
--- Page 1 ---
STUDY COURSE IN —
_ HOMOEOPATHY
PHYLLISSPEIGHT



--- Page 2 ---
e
. fo
- oR
a
ast “x
.


--- Page 3 ---
| F Se
SPECS Hu

A STUDY COURSE
iN
HOMOEOPATHY

by
PHYLLIS SPEIGHT

JAIN PUBLISHING CO.
NEW DELHI-110055


--- Page 4 ---
By the same author
A COMPARISON OF THE CHRONIC MIASMS
ARNICA THE WONDER HERB
BEFORE CALLING THE DOCTOR
QovVERCOMING RHEUMATISM AND ARTHRITIS

R:
iS
S

2

WN ee

ISBN 0850 32164 6

CW Publishers : JAIN PUBLISHING Co.
9 2798, Rajguru Road,
NEW DELHI-110055.

Distributors : HARJEET & Co.

1920, Street 10, Chuna Mandi,
Post Box 5752, New Delhi-55.

Price : Bs. 15.00,

Printers - J.J, Offset Printers,
Mayapuri, New Delhi


--- Page 5 ---
Introduction

Lesson |

Lesson 2

Lesson 3

Lesson 4

Lesson 5

CONTENTS

PRINCIPLES GE HOMOZOPATHY
What is Homoeopathy; The Founding
of Hiomoeopathy; The Four Funda-
mental Laws; Summary; Test Paper.

WHAT IS DISEASE?
The Cause of Disease; The Proving of
Remedies; The Study of
Remedies;Aconitum Napellus; Nux
Vomica; Test Paper.

THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE
The Preparation of Homocopathic
Remedies; The Potency to Use; The
Skin and Perspiration; Vomiting;
Belladonna; Arnica; Hypericum; Test
Paper.

CHRONIC DISEASE (Psora, Syphilis,
Sycosis)
Evacuation of the Bowel; Urine; The
Appetite; Thirst; Arsenicum Album;
Chamomilla; Ledum; Test Paper.

THE PSORIC MIASM.
Symptorns of Psora; The Tongue;
Expectoration; Sulphur; Calcarea
Carbonica; Test Paper.



--- Page 6 ---
Lesson6 THESYPHILITIC MIASM
The Syphilitic Miasm; The Sycotic
Miasm; Pain; The Fulse; Thuja;
Mercurius; Test Paper.

Lesson 7 COMBINED MIASMS
Use of the Nosodes; Temperature;
Respiration; Baptisia; Eupatorium
Perf.; Hepar Sulphuris; Test Paper.

Lesson 8 THE PHYSICIAN’S PURPOSE
The Condition of the Patient; Past
History; Family History; Occu-
pational History; Habits; Social
History; Past History; Taking the Case;
Bryonia; Rhus Toxicodendron; Urtica
Urens; Test Paper.

Lesson 9 AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS
Analysis of the Case; China; Carbo
Yeg.; Lycopodium; Test Paper.

Lesson 10 REPERTORISING
Pulsatilla; Allium Cepa: Test Paper.

Lesson!1 ADMINISTRATION OF THE
REMEDY
Remedy Reaction; Acute and Chronic
Disorders; Homoeopathic Aggravation;
Silica; Gelsemium; Ignatia; Test Paper.

Lesson 12  Speedy.Prescribing; Homoeopathic
Rem€dies; Diet; ‘he Homoeopathic
Lay Practitioner; Summary; Test
Paper.

Bibliography

Specimen Answers to the Test Papers


--- Page 7 ---
INTRODUCTION

In presenting this course of instruction on Homoeopathy, |
am attempting the very difficult task of condensing a philo-
sophy and art of medicine into a comparatively simple form
whereby those who are truly interested in the Art of Healing
may be encouraged to study man and the ills that afflict him.

To do this I have tried to give the basic points necessary for
an understanding of this vast subject but I emphasize that
text books must be obtained for study and reference. These will
be recommended as we go along.

Hahnemann the founder of Homoeopathy said: “There are
no diseases but only sick persons’ and when this is considered it
will be realised that every experience and every bit of know-
ledge that can be garnered will be of essential value to those who
would treat Homoeopathically. ‘

The unqualified practitioner can and does do very useful
work especially in these days when qualified Homoeopathic
Physicians are few, but it must be remembered that the layman
is always limited by the absence of a hospital training and the
experience that Can be gained thereby; and the fact that his
physical examination ofthe patient can only be on the surface of
the body. At no time sfrauld the layman make an internal
examination ofa patient but be prepared to call in the advice of
a qualified physician ifa particular case appears to warrant it.

The course of 12 lessgns leads the student from a knowledge
of the basic principles of Homoeopathy to an understanding of
their application to sick people in relation to acute and chronic
affections. Some of the most important Homoeopathic remedies
are outlined. The method of case-taking and suggestions for
questioning the patient are detailed in the effort to help the
beginner to collate his facts accurately.

Only by such care and precise work can the real value of
Homoeopathic treatment become an established fact. I would
ask every student to remember that in undertaking to treat any

I


--- Page 8 ---
9) : INTRODUCTION

sick person, however simple the affection or injury may be, he is
taking on a real responsibility. Homoeopathy is a great study
and not to be undertaken lightly, but it well repays the efforts
and sacrifices tt entails.

Restoration to health and happiness becomes apparent when
the correct remedy is administered according to the laws laid
down by Hahnemann.

Each lesson is accompanied by a short question paper, which
the student should answer when he feels he has mastered the
particular lesson. Specimen answers are given at the end of the

book.


--- Page 9 ---
Lesson J
PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEOPATHY

“Truth for which all the eager world is fain,
which makes us happy, lies for evermore
Not buried deep but lightly covered o'er,

By the wise Hand that destined it for men’

What is Homoeopathy

The followers of the Law of Similars believe that disease. is
intimately associated with the life of the individual and is a
result of internal concealed causes; that pathological tissue
changes are the end-results of the disease, and if cure is to be
effected the whole individual man must be treated.

No two persons are exactly alike, each individual being made
up of particular characteristics by which he is distinguished
from his neighbour — the form of the body, colour of the hair
and eyes, height, gait, abilities and so on. Similarly no two
persons react in the same way to a particular medical treat-
ment. Those who believe in the Law of Similars, therefore, use a
system of medicine by which their remedies are prescribed
strictly according to the individual requirements of each sick
person.

Homoeopathy is based on the Law of Similars. Indeed, the
word itself is from the Greek-Homoion meaning ‘Similar’, and °
Pathos meaning ‘Disease’. The Law of Similars means that a
remedy which creates symptoms and conditions in a healthy
person will cure a sick person manifesting similar symptoms.
This can be summed up in the dictum Similia Similibus Curen-
tur.

The Founding of Homoeopathy

‘An illness is caused by similar means and similar means can
cure men of illness, e.g. the same agent brings about strangury
when it is not present, and does away with it, when it is.
Coughing, like strangury, is caused and is made to disappear by

8)



--- Page 10 ---
4 PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEOPATHY | Lesson 1

the same means. Vomiting is stopped by being made to vomit.’
Hippocrates 460-377 B.C.

Homoeopathy was founded by Dr Samuel Hahnemann
(1755-1843). Receiving his degree of M.D. in 1779, he soon
earned the reputation of being a brilliant chemist and one of the
most distinguished physicians in Germany at that time. Yet as
his experience grew, he became more and more dissatisfied with
the current medical practice which consisted largely of bleeding
and purging the patient, or forcing him to swallow large
draughts of drug mixtures supposedly good for the particular
complaint suffered.

After a few years experience of these methods Hahnemann
felt that the cure of disease, or even the restoration of health,
was so problematical that he was compelled to give up his
practice, and earned his living subsequently by making trans-
lations of works on chemistry and medicine. In 1790 he was
translating an English Materia Medica into German and found
that he could not agree with the explanation of the action of
Cinchona Bark (Quinine) in the cure of ague.

During his medical training Hahnemann spent two years in
the marshy lands of Hungary where he came into contact with
malaria (ague fever) which was rife in the district. When he left
he had a thorough knowledge of this disease and the treatment
to cure it. Now he decided to test Cinchona on himself. Let us
take up the story in his own words:

‘For the sake of experiment, I took for several days four
quentschen (drachms) of good Cinchona twice a day. My feet,
the tips of my fingers, etc., first became cold, and I felt tired and
sleepy; then my heart began to beat, my pulse became hard and
quick, I got an insufferable feeling of uneasiness, a trembling
(but without rigor), a weariness in all my limbs, then a beating
in my head, redness of the cheeks, thirst; in short, all the old
symptoms with which I was familiar in Ague appeared one after
the other. Also, those particularly characteristic symptoms
which | was wont to observe in Agues-obtuseness of the senses,
a kind of stiffness in all the limbs, but especially that dull
disagreeable feeling which seems to have its seat in the perio-
steum of all the bones of the body, — these all put in an appear-
ance. This paroxysm lasted each time for two or three hours,
and came again afresh whenever I repeated the dose, not other-


--- Page 11 ---
ow

PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEOPATHY Lesson |

wise. I left off, and became well.’

Note that when Hahnemann ceased taking the drug the
symptoms disappeared, yet when he repeated his experiment
identical symptoms returned. It was a genuine drug effect. That
which could cure ague could also produce symptoms similar to those of
ague.

Opponents of Homoeopathy have sought to discredit this
initial experiment of Hahnemann’s, stating that Cinchona has
no real power of causing in the healthy such a fever as that
‘imagined’ by him, and that its action inthe cure of ague is not
on the body but on the minute organisms of which Malaria
consists. Yet over the years, abundant proof of the true action of
Cinchona has been found, agreeing in all details with Hahne-
mann’s experiment. Later you will read how all drugs have an
individual and characteristic effect on the body, and it is suf-
ficient here to state that the experiment which Hahnemann
undertook to find the true action of Cinchona gave him his
initial insight into the Law of Similars.

Continuing his story: ‘If now commenced to make a collection of
the morbid phenomena which different observers had from
time to time noticed as produced by medicines introduced into
the stomachs of healthy individuals, and which they had casu-
ally recorded in their works. But as the number of these was not
so great, I set myself diligently to work to test several medicinal
substances on the healthy body and see the carefully observed
symptoms they produced corresponded wonderfully with
symptoms of the morbid states they would easily and per- .
manently cure.’

For six years Hahnemann continued his experiments and
studies before tentatively making his fradings known. He then
wrote an essay in a current medical journal! in which he stated:
‘Every powerful medicinal substance produces in the human
body a peculiar kind of disease — the more powerful the medi-
cine, the more peculiar, marked and violent the disease. We
should imitate nature, which sometimes cures a chronic disease
by superadding another, and employ in the disease we wish to
cure that medicine which is able to produce another very
similar artificial disease, and the former will be cured, similia
similibus.’

In 1810 Hahnemann produced ‘The Organon of Rational
Medicine’ in which he gives a full dissertation on the theory of


--- Page 12 ---
6 PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEOPATHY Lesson 1

his meihod, together with detailed instructions for the examina-
tion of patients, proving of drugs, and for the selection of
remedies according to the Homoeopatiic principle.

In the introduction he set out his newly discovered rules of
healing as follows: ‘Hitherto, Diseases of man were not healed in
a rational way or according to fixed principles, but rather
according to very varied curative purposes, amongst others,
according to the palliative rule: contraria contrariis curentur.
In contrast to this is the truth, the real way of healing, which I
am pointing out in this volume: In order to cure gently, quickly
and lastingly, choose in every case of illness a remedy which can
itselfarouse a similar malady to that which it is to cure (similia
similibus curentur)!

‘Hitherto nobody has taught this Homoeopathic method of
healing. But if it is truth who is prescribing this method, then
even if Sue has been disregarded for thousands of years, it is to
be expected that traces of Her Immortal influence can be
discovered in all epochs. And so it is.’

He then traces various glimmerings throughout history of the
action of Homocopathic Law. He did not pretend to be the first
and on!;; discoverer of this method of healing. but stressed the
fact that “Till now nobody has taught this Homocopathic way of
healing. nobody has carried tt out.”

It should be noted that, in all, six editions of The Organon
were completed by Hahnemann. Progressively over the years.
as his knowledge of pure drug actions in the treatment of disease
grew, so additions and amendments were made to the original
treatise. But the basic, fundamental structure of The Organon
remained, and remains today, for anyone to follow.

Throughout this course we shall be making constant refer-
ences to The Organon and to Hahnemann’s subsequent writings
in order that you may obtain an insight into the Master's puilo-
sophy. He makes clear at the outset what is required to practice
the healing art and it is fitting that we should. in this first lesson,
thoroughly understand Hahnemann’s injunctions: “The
docter’s highest and only calling is to make sick men well. to
cure, 2s it 1s called.’

If the physician clearly perceives what is to be cured in
diseases, that is to say, in every individual case of disease
(knowledge of disease, indication); if he clearly perceives what
is Curative in medicines, that is to say, in each individual


--- Page 13 ---
PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEOPATHY Lesson} 7

medicine (knowledge cf medicinal powers); and if he isnows
how to adapt, according to clearly-defined principles, what is
curative in medicines to what he has discovered to be un-
doubtedlv morbid in the patient, so that recovery must ensue —
to adapt it, as well in respect to the suitableness of the medicine
mosi appropriate according to its mode of action to the case
be'ore him (choice of the remedy, the medicine indicated), as
also in respect to the exact and proper period for repea:ing the
dose; if, finally, he knows the obstacles to recovery and is aware
how tc remove them, so that the restoration may be permanent;
then he understands how to treat judiciously and rationally,
and he is a true practitioner of the healing art.’ |

The Four Fundamental Laws

1. The Law of Similars

2. The single remedy.

3. The minimum dose.

4. The direction of cure. (This will be dealt with later)

On these laws the whole application of Homoeopat=.’ as an
art of medicine rests, but added to this is the necessity for an
accurate knowledge of each patient and the true observation of
him and the manifestations of his sickness.

We have already explained the Law of Similars and we must
now consider the second and third laws, the single remecy and
the minimum dose.

Vhile the first law (The Law of Similars) must always apply,
Hahnemann stated: ‘The day of true knowledge of medicines
and of the true healing art will dawn when physicians shall trust ~
the cure of complete cases of disease to a single medicinal
substance, and when... they will employ for the extinction and
cure of a case of disease. whose symptoms they have invesii-
gated, one single medicinal substance, whose positive effects they
have ascertained, which can show among these effects a group
of symptoms very similar to those presented by the case of
disease...

And again: ‘In no case of healing is it necessary (and for that
reason alone it is unpermissible) to use more than one simple
medicina! substance on the patient at a time. It is diflicult to
understand why there should be the slightest doubt about
whether it is more natural and more rational in a case of ifinese
io use only one simple medicinal substance of known qualit


--- Page 14 ---
8 PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEFOPATHY — Lesson |

at a time or a mixture of several different ones. In Homoeo-
pathy, the only true, simple and rational science of healing, it is
absolutely unpermissible to give the patient wwvo different medi-
cinal substances at the same time.”

The necessity for the third law of Homoeopathic medicine
was brought about by Hahnemann’s observations that when
prescribing the similar remedy in the then recognised dosage,
the disease was initially aggravated. From this he deduced that
the dose prescribed was too large and proceeded, therefore, to
dilute the remedy on strictly mathematical lines. He found that
by this method he not only avoided the aggravations of the
disease, but the efficiency of the medicine was increased.

‘The spiritual power of medicine achieves its object not by
quantity but by quality.’

“The suitability of a medicine for any given case of disease
does not depend on its accurate homoeopathic selection alone,
but likewise on the proper size, or rather smallness of the dose.’

“A medicine which when given by itself in a sufficiently large
dose to a healthy individual produces a definite effect, that is, a
number of its: own peculiar symptoms, preserving its own
tendencies, will be able to produce them even in the smallest
dose . . . for curative purposes incredibly small doses are suf-
ficient . . . if instead of smaller and smaller doses, increasingly
large ones were given, then (after the original disease has dis-
appeared) there arise merely medicinal symptoms, a kind of
artificial and unnecessary disease. .. How much the sensitive-
ness of the body towards medicinal stimuli increases the illness
can only be appreciated by the accurate observer. Especially
when the disease has become very serious, this surpasses all
belief. . . On the othey hand, it is just as true as it is remark-
able that even the most robust people, who are suffering from a
chronic disease, notwithstanding their abundant physical
strength, as soon as they are given the medicine positively
helpful in their chronic disease, experience just as great an im-
pression from the smallest possible dose, as if they were suckling
babes.’

From these quotations you will realise that the mathematical
reduction of the amount of medicine introduces ant enurely new
approach in dealing with sickness and disease.

The reduction of the dose (potenuzatron or dynamisation)
wiil be dealt with in greater detail later. it should be noted that


--- Page 15 ---
PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEOPATHY Lesson ! 9

Hahnemann applied his rules in the treatment of all sick
persons and invariably found that he could cure when other
methods failed.

Summary
1. Homoeopathy _ the art of medicine based on the Law of
Similars.
2. Homoeopathy was founded : d developed by Samuel
Hahnemann, a German physician and chemist, who col-
lated his theories in a book called “The Organon’.

3. The four Laws of Homoeopathy:
1. The Law of Similars; 2. The single remedy;
3. The minimum dose; 4. The direction of cure.

The keen student must obtain a copy of The Principles and Art
of Cure by Homoeopathy by Dr Herbert A. Roberts and Chapters I
and JJ should be studied carefully.

TEST PAPER No. 1

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

1. What is the basic fundamentai Law of Homoeopathy?

2. It is maintained that Homoeopathy treats the individual
patient. State briefly why this is so.

3. Why is it advisable to use single remedies only?


--- Page 16 ---
WHAT IS DISEASE?

The two dominant schools of medicine look upon disease, its
nature, cause and cure, from totally different standpoints.

The allopathic or orthodox school regards disease as a posi-
tive material entity, caused by the invasion of the organism
from the outside, by some obnoxious forcign element or ele-
ments, which. are to be antidoted,. destroy ed. or expelled in the
most direct manner possible. ‘This purely material view of
disease linds its culmination in the so-called ‘germ-theory’.

In contrast, the homoeopath looks upon disease as a dynamic
disturbance of that harmonious relation, which in health exists
between the material body and the wital_ force which animates
that body.

Paragraph 16 of the ‘Organon’ teaches us the very important
lesson that our sickness comes from dynamic disturbances and
that, therefore, our curative agents must have a similar dyna-
mic guality.

The material evidence of chronic disease manifesting in the
physical body is but the result oflong continued derangement of
the vital force, perhaps perverted during the lifetime ofan indh-
vidual, and incited by an inherited tendency which again may
“have been in many generations of his ancestors.

This is one of the greatest stumbling biocks to students of
Homoeopathy. It is so difficult to grasp chat it is the man himself
who is sick, a well as a part, or an organ. Serious consequences
are often the result when the importance of this law is not fully
appreciated. and attempts are made to cure disease by re-
moving an affected organ. part or tumour. without first attack-
ing it through its symptomatology. The vital force that has been
brought to work in an orderly manner by the use of the indi-
cated remedies, will often remove all kinds of ee ina
way that is surprising.

No organ functions completely independently of any other

10

=


--- Page 17 ---
WHAT IS DISEASE? Lesson 2 11

organ, nor does it become diseased independently of itself. for
the reason that it depends on other organs for some part of its
life, and in turn the functions performed by it are necessary for
the well being of other organs in the human economy.

One organ cannot become diseased without its functions
becoming first impaired and thereby disturbing the normal
functions of other organs, to a greater or less exteni, through
improper stimulation. It is therefore plain that the whole man is
sick also, and that the totality of symptoms is an index of the
diseased condition and a guide for treatment.

Organic diseases are changes in the structure of the organs
themselves. This condition must have had a beginning which
was of a functional nature. This state is not completely revealed
by examination but through the sensations and functions of
those parts of the organism felt by the patient and observed by
the physician. These are morbid symptoms. ‘1n no other way can it
make itself known.’

Therefore, disease is first a ‘change of state’ ultimating in dis-
function of vital processes, to be soon followed by morbid cell
growth or tissue change.

This is probably the most difficult point in Homoeopathic
philosophy to accept. Unless the student has a clear under-
standing that the vital processes of the patient must be taken
into consideration as well as the part or organ that is sick, then
cure cannot be achieved.

The Cause of Disease

Disease does not ‘just happen’. Its origin may be from an
event or series of events, extending over many years. Sometimes
the cause is an inherited constitutional fault, or it may be a
progressive accumulation of toxic material in the organisms
created by defective elimination. Other causative factors are
bad hygiene, over-induigence in bad habits, over-eating or mal-
nutrition.

Ailments often appear as a result of a severe mental or
physical shock such as-grief, prolonged anxiety, or great dis-
appointment.

It will be seen, thercfore, that the fundamental causes of
disease spring from twc main sources:

1. Inherited — the type of constitution.


--- Page 18 ---
12 WHAT IS DISEASE? Lesson 2
2. Acquired — direct contamination, physical or emotional
shocks, hygiene and dietetic lapses.

Inherited Causes. These are being dealt with at length later as
they are most important in our treatment of chronic ailments.
Acquired Causes. Direct contamination covers the endemic and
epidemic diseases. Endemic is the term applied to disease
which exists in particular localities or amongst certain races.
For example cholera is an enclemic disease of certain parts of
Asia. Epidemic is the term applied to a disease which affects a
large number of people in a particular locality at one time. This
type of disease is, therefore, infectious from person to person.

Many epidemic diseases occur at certain regular seasons. For
example, typhoid fever begins to show itself in August, in-
creases during the autumn months and gradually decreases
during the winter. Scarlatina and diphtheria are autumnal
complaints. Whooping cougn usually occurs during the spring.
Measles produces two epidemics, one in mid-summer and one
in December.

Physical and emotional shocks which may be the root cause
of a patient’s disorder will be revealed when the patient is
questioned by the practitioner; from this questioning any
hygienic or dietetic lapses should also become evident.

it should be noted that all curable diseases created by these
causes can be removed, or greatly modified, by correct
Homoeopathic treatment. In simple or acute cases, the correct
remedy produces an almost instantaneous effect. A demonstra-
tion of this rapid action will be scen when Arnica is given for
shock and bruising from an accident.

In chronic cases one may have to wait weeks, or even months,
but improvement will foilow providing the disease has not ulti-
mated itself in gross patnological changes.

The Proving of Remedies

‘Hahnemann spenta great deal of his life, aided by some fifty
keen fellow workers (mostly doctors) in testing, or ‘proving’
remedies as to their subversive possibilities in regard to human
sensations and health, and he most carefully recorded his
findings in the simple language of the provers, and according to
a definite schema which renders them readily accessible. These
drug provings formed the nucleus of the Homoeopathic


--- Page 19 ---


--- Page 20 ---
14 F WHAT IS DISEASE? Lesson 2

ness. It is Hahnemann alone, who in his Law of Similars,
established for all time the relationship between drug and
disease, i.e. between drug-disease and natural disease; proving
that the one can neutralise and extinguish the other; and so
made medicine not only scientific but practical.

In Hahnemann’s words ‘A fundamental principle of the
Homoeopathic physician (which distinguishes him from every
physician of all the older schools) is this, that he never employs
for any patient a medicine, whose effects on the healthy human
has not been previously and carefully proved and thus made
known to him. To prescribe for the sick on mere conjecture of
some possible usefulness for some similar disease, or from hear-
say. “that a remedy has helped in such and such a disease” —
such conscienceless venture the philanthropic homoeopathist
will leave the Allopath.’

‘These morbid disturbances called forth by drugs in the
healthy body, must be accepted as the only possible revelation
of their inherent curative power. Through them only we are
able to discover what capacity of producing disease — and
hence what capacity of curing disease — is possessed by each
individual drug.’

Every medicine has its own peculiar action on the human
body, unlike that of any other and therefore medicines must be
tested on healthy individuals in order to obtai: an accurate
Knowledge of their powers; the provers must be very trust-
worthy and they must be able to describe thcir sensations
accurately. Medicines must be tested on males and females in
order that any alterations in the health of the sexual sphere may
be revealed. All the symptoms of a medicine will] not appear in
one person, or al] at onces

All the various symptoms from the drug proving are subse-
quently collected and collated and written down in the form of
the schema and this constitutes the record in the Materia
Medica.

Chapter XV of Roberts’ Principles and Art of Cure by Homoeo-
pathy on Drug Proving should be studied.

The Study of Remedies

The student must become familiar with as many remedies as

possible and there is no substitute for hard work to achieve this
end.


--- Page 21 ---
WHAT IS DISEASE? Lesson 2 15

Knowledge of the mental symptoms is essential as the inner-
most part of man is the most important (his loves, desires etc.).

The characteristics of each remedy must be mastered, for
instance, you would not give Sulphur as a chronic remedy to a
patient who is fastidious to a degree about his home and his
person; neither would vou give Arsenicum Alb., to a patient
with slovenly habits.

Modalities must be memorised; in other words, aggravations
or ameliorations from weather conditions, motion, heat, touch,
position, certain foods ete.

The marked desires and aversions, aggravations and amelio-
rations should be etched on the mind of the student; those
which affect the patient as a whole and those which modify the
affected part. These are sometimes contradictory as in Arseni-
cum Alb., where the patient himselfis worse cold but his head is
better for cold air.

The student should note the locality of the body to which the
remedy especially applies — not only the organ influenced by
the remedy should be learned but also the tissues — e.g.
Bryoaia is suitable for inflammation of sérous membranes,
where Belladonna is rarely so.

Throughout this course we give details ofa number of reme-
dies and these should be studied in several Materia Medicas
and the student should equip himself from the following:

Clarke’s Dictionary of Practical Materia Medica which is the fullesi
as regards the number of remedies. This is a large work in 3.
volumes with a section at the beginning giving the charac-
teristic symptoms. It is a very important addition to the library.

Kent’s Lectures on Homoeopathic Mateita Medica should be ob-
tained by every student as, although informal in style, this
author gives wonderful mental pictu-es of approximately 300
remedies.

Tyler’s Homoeopathic Drug Pictures also, should be on the book-
shelf of the keen student. One hundred and twenty five reme-
dies are covered and in addition to the basic information Dr.
Tyler quotes from several sources and illustrates the points she
is making by short case histories from her records.

There is, of course, nothing like going to the fountain head for
information and Hahnemann’s Materia Medica Pura, the prime


--- Page 22 ---
16 WHAT IS DISEASE? Lesson 2

source of the subject is packed with a mass of symptoms.
There are many more which, no doubt, will be collected as
time goes on but too long a list may confuse the student, how-
ever, one more is worthy of note here and that is Hering’s Con-
densed Materia Medica which covers over 400 remedies.
In each case do read the Preface before proceeding. Each author
writes to explain his method of presentation.

ACONITUM NAPELLUS

Characteristics

Anxiety; Unreasonable Fears; Terror; Restlessness. Pains,

which are to the patient intolerable. Suddenness of ailments;

worse cold dry winds.

Mind: Tension, emotional and menta! as shown in
fright or fear and its consequences. Unreason-
able fears of something that will happen. Rest-
lessness, tossing about in agony — (the fear help-
ing to make him restless).

Head: Vertigo worse exposure to sun. Headaches
through exposure to sun generally, better in open
air; worse in warm room. Headache worse drink-

ing.
Eyes: Affections worse dry cold winds. Inflammations
from cold, injury, dust and surgical operations.
Nose: Fluent coryza, frequent sneezing, dripping of
clear hot water; worse cold drv winds.
Face: Red and flushed but turns pale on rising up from
bed. Dry’burning heat without sweat (fever).
Mouth: Dryness; unquenchable thirst. Everything tastes

bitter except water. Tongue white or yellow-
white; prickling or burning sensation.

Pain and deep reciness of affected part; scraping,
tingling sensation with burning and prickling,
chiefly on swallowing. Acute inflammation of
throat.

Continual tickling of larynx with constant desire
to cough. Cough worse eating and drinking;
short and dry; particularly at night..

Oppression of chest worse ascending. Cough

Throat:

Respiratory:

Chest:


--- Page 23 ---
WHAT IS DISEASE? Lesson 2 17

worse every inspiration. After cough. tingling in
chest. Cough worse cold dry winds.

Limbs: Pains tearing and cutting accompanied with
tingling and numbness; patient very restless.
Motion aggravates pains in muscles, joints and
stiffness. All these pains are worse cold dry
winds.

Modalities: | Worse cold dry winds; worse in evening; worse
lying on left side; worse in warm room or for
warm covering. Better uncovering — kicks off
the clothes.

MUX VCMICA

Charactertstics

Over sensitive; every harmless word offends. Sensttive to every

little noise. Great heat, who!e body burning hot, especiaily face

red and hot, yet patient cannot move or uncover in the least

without feeling chilly. Frequent and ineffectual desire to de-

faecate or passing but small quantities of faeces at each aitempt.

Awakens tired and weak and generally worse (many com-

plaints).

Mind: Angry and very irritable and peevish. Excitabie,
fiery temper. Breaks out in acts of violence.

Head: Burning pain in forehead after eating and on
waking; pressing pain in forehead worse cold air.
Headaches from menta! exertion, chagrin or
anger. Headaches worse in open air; on waking;
after eating; from abuse of coffee, spirits, on
stooping, from light, noise, moving eyes. high
living ete.

Nose: Coryza a.m. better epen air. Coryza from sitting
on cold stones or steps. Stopped up nose.

Stomach: After eating, sour taste. Pressure in stomach an

hour or so after eating with tightness about waist,

must loosen clothing. Confused in mind 2—3
hours after cating, epigastrium bloated with’
pressure as from stone in stomach. Patient says
‘If I could only vornit I would feel better’. The
patient is worse for coffee, alcoholic drinks,


--- Page 24 ---
18 WHAT IS DISEASE? Lesson 2

debauchery, abuse of drugs, business anxiety,
sedentary habits, too high living etc.

Rectum: Constipation but constant desire for stool,
passing but small quantities of faeces at each
attempt. [he harder one strains the harder it is to
pass stools.

Back: Sore bruised beaten feeling in lumbar region.
Lumbago worse lying in bed. Must sit up to turn
over in bed. Backache worse 3—4 a.m.

Chill: Chilly — cannot get warm however many extra
clothes or bedcovers he has —— worse uncovering.
Modalities: Better heat (except head); unbroken sleep. (very

‘chilly patient). Worse around 4 a.m. and worse
from losing sleep. Worse mental effort and dry
cold and windy weather.

Nux Vomica acts best when given at night.

Nash says ‘More stress may be placed upon the cause of the
stomach, liver and abdominal complaints for which Nux Vom.,
is the remedy. For instance, coffee, alcoholic drinks, debau-
chery, abuse of drugs, business anxiety, sedentary habits,
broken rest from long night-watching, too high living etc.’

TEST PAPER No. 2

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

|. What are the causes of disease?
2. Why are provings made only on healthy persons?

3. Give five characteristic indications of Aconitum.


--- Page 25 ---
Lesson 3
THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE

Bodily reactions to the similar remedy occur in a definite
direction, viz:

Cure takes place from above downward; from within out-
ward; from an important organ to a less important organ;
symptoms disappear in the reverse order of their appearance, |
the first to appear being the last to disappear.

Let us consider these axioms.

1. From above downward. When the correct remedy has been
administered it is seen that the pain in the shoulder will
travel down the arm to the hand, or from the hip to the
foot.

2. From within outward. Crises of elimination often occur, e.g.
an eruption breaks out on the skin, there is an increased
flow of urine, or the symptoms of a severe cold become
apparent. These manifestations should never be inter-
ferred with. Nature is attempting to rid the system of
disease attacking the deeper orgars by bringing the bye-
products to the surface — the cure taking place from the
important organ such as the heart, the kidneys, etc., to the
less important, the bladder, the skin, etc.

3. Symptoms disappear in the reverse order of their appearance.
Measles can be taken as an example, the cough coming
first and departing last, the rash coming last and
departing first. In cases of chronic disease it is found that
the patient will retrace the road along which his disease
has travelled and he will experience again the various
ailments from which he has suffered until he gets back to
the conditions from which his disease started.

We observe from this law that foliowing the administration of
the remedy, if some unexpected crisis occurs, such as is men-
tioned above, or the patient suddenly finds that he has pro-

19


--- Page 26 ---
20 THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3

duced symptoms of a complaint he had long ago, this is excel-
lent and we must allow the curative process to continue un-
disturbed. On no account should further medicine be given at this point.
Read Chapter 10 of Roberts’ The Principles G Art of Cure by
Homoeopathy.

The Preparation of Homoeopathic Remedies

“To serve the purposes of Homoeopathy, the spirit-like medi-
cinal powers of crude substances are developed to an un-
paralleled degree by means of a process which was never
attempted before, and which causes medicines to penetrate the
organism, and thus to become more efficacious and remedial. It
is applicable even to those substances which, in their crude
state, do not evince the least medicinal effect upon the human
body.’ — The Organon.

Homoeopathic dosage is in conformity with the law of
physics that Action and Reaction are equal and oppasite. All
remedies have this dual action in the body —a primary physio-
logic, or toxic (harmful) action, and a secondary therapeutic or
curative action’ The possible good effect of any remedy is
directly proportional to its power to derange the healthy human
organisin. Hence those remedies which are the greatest poisons
when administered in a large dose become the greatest medi-
cines when administered in a minute dose.

When Hahnemann realised that the aggravation of disease
was due to the strength ofa remedy he systematically reduced it
by a method which has continued to the present day. This
method is known as potentisation and may be described as
follows:

In a phial containing’99 drops of alcohol | drop of the strong
tincture of a remedy is added and the whole vigorously shaken.
This proportion of | in 100 is called the first centesimal dilution
or Ic. Of this solution | dron is added to another phiai contain-
ing 99 drops of alcohol — this is again shaken, thus giving the
second centesimal dilution (2c) and this procedure is repeated
until the required potency is achieved.

Insoluble substances are {,.ound up with sugar of milk in the
same proportions as above, ina porcelain mortar, and again the
1 in 100 potency is obtained. One grain of this with 99 grains of
sugar of milk ground up gives the 2c potency. When the third
centesimal or one in a million has been reached, then the sub-


--- Page 27 ---
Accession Noun amas

pate. Solon

THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3 2]

stance becomes soluble in alcohol or water and potencies may
be followed along the lines for liquid medicines.

Since Hahnemann’s time another scale has also been used,
whereby the proportion of remedy to alcohol is I in 10 only.
This is the decimal scale and remedies made up in this scale
have X after the number of the potency — e.g. 3x, 6x.

The following extract from Hahnemann’s Chronic Diseases
will be of interest:

“The alteration which is effected in the properties of natural
substances, especially medicina! substances, either by tritu-
rating or shaking them in conjunction with a non-medicinal
powder or liquid, is almost marvellous. This discovery is due to
Homoeopathy. Besides this alteration of their medicinal pro-
perties, the homocopathic mode of preparing medicines pro-
duces an alteration in their chemical properties. Whereas, in
their crude form, they are insoluble either in water or alcohol.
they become entirely soluble, both in water and alcohol, by
mean of this homoeopathic transformation. This discovery is
invaluable to the healing art.’

“The brown-black juice of a sea-insect, Sepia, which was
formerly used only for painting and drawing, is soluble in water
only, while in its unprepared form. When homoeopathically
prepared by trituration, it becomes soluble in alcohol. . .’

‘Lycopodi pollen floats in alcohol and on the surface of water,
without either of these substances having the least effect upon
the drug; Lycopodium in its crude state, on being introduced
into the stomach, is both tasteless and inactive. Trituration
makes it soluble in both alcohol and water, and develops such a
powerful medicinal action in the drug that its use requires great

j '
care.

‘Who ever found marble, er the shell of an oyster soluble in
water or alcohol? This mild calcarea, as wel! as baryta car-
bonica and magnesia, becomes perfectly soluble by means of
the homocopathic trituration, wnich, moreover develops their
medicinal powers to an astonishing degree.’

The Potency to Use

Hahnemann made this observation on potencies: *Experi-
ence proves that the dose of a homoeopathicaliy selected
remedy cannot be reduced so far as to be inferior in strength to
the natura! disease, and to lose its power of extinguishing and


--- Page 28 ---
99 THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3

curing at least a proportion of the same, provided that this dose,
immediately after having been taken, is capable of causing a
slight intensification of symptoms of the similar natural
disease.’

The ‘slight intensification of symptoms’ refers to the aggra-
vation of symptoms which follows administration of the similar
remedy, and should be noted as being a direct effect caused by
the similarity of the remedy symptoms to the disease symptoms,
and to the potency used.

Following are the rules which will guide you in deciding the
potency to use:

1. Be sure that the remedy selected is a near similar (or
similimum).

2. When the remedy has been selected it should be given in
the appropriate potency until no appreciable improve-
ment in the patients condition is observable. If the
patients condition is not completely cured and the
symptoms remain the same, the potency may then be
advanced, i.e. if the first prescription was given in the 6th
the second can be advanced to the 30th — but under no
circumstances should remedies be changed unless ihe
symptoms warrant it.

3. Low potencies only should be used when the disease has
caused a great amount of organic change. For example, in
an advanced case of arthritis a high potency wou!d prob-
ably cause a severe and most painful aggravation. Simi-
larly a sharp reaction is usually observed in chronic skin
complaints when a high potency is given.

4. The higher potencies should only be prescribed where
there is little or no organic change, and the indication for
the remedy very definite. These are not generally for the
beginner or layman to use as the reactions resulting can
present grave complications and even endanger life.

. In general, use the lower potencies in acute conditions
(6th—12th) and the higher potencies (30th—200th) in
chronic conditions. It will be found that one dose alone is
often sufficient to bring about a marked improvement ina
chronic case which will continue for some considerable


--- Page 29 ---
THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3 : 23

time. The dose should, therefore, not be repeated until
there is an indication of definite relapse.

Note most carefully any warning given in the Materia
Medicas about certain remedies and their effects in parti-
cular complaints. For example, Drosera and Silica in res-

piratory affections and Sulphur in its relation to incipient
alae

Read Chapters 12 and 13 of Roberts’ The Principles @ Art of Cure
by Homoeopathy

In this, and following lessons, some general information is
given regarding the skin, bowels, vomiting, urine, appetite,
thirst, tongue, expectoration, pain, the pulse, temperature and
respiration.

These general hints help to determine, in some cases, the
cause of sickness.

The Skin and Perspiration

In health the skin is soft and slightly moist. There should be
no roughness, tension, or cracking of the surface.

Normal perspiration is a means of excreting waste products
from the body and amounts to considerably over one pint in
twenty four hours. It is a slightly acid fluid containing a very
small percentage of solids made up chiefly of salts, a little fatty
material and a smal] amount of urea, the substance which the
kidneys secrete in large amounts. When the action of the
kidneys is defective the skin tends to compensate by excreting
urea and other waste products in increased quantities. This will
be recognised by offensive odour, or by the staining of linen.

Excessive perspiration, unless produted by healthy exercise,
will be observed in:

1. A critical phase in an acute condition. This is an evidence
of bodily reaction to the disease and will be observed by an
improvement in the condition which will follow.

2. An early phase of disease when it is actually a symptom of
the disease, e.g. in various stages of fevers. There is no
relicf following a sweat of this nature.

Localised sweating, e.g. on the head, is found 1n certain con-
ditions. In children a profuse perspiration around the head and
neck when asleep indicates a tendency to rickets.


--- Page 30 ---
24 THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3

Severe nighi-sweats are a strong indication of the tubercular
constitution, and where a history of such sweats is elicited it is
always advisable to call ina qualified Homoeopathic Physician.

In an acute condition, however, the critical sweat mentioned
in (1) above is evidenced by the whole body surface perspiring
at the same time, with a relaxation of tension, return to normal
pulse-rate, and immediate relief of other symptoms — (see
notes on temperatures).

Vomiting

This is brought about by the concerted action of abdominal
and stomach muscles controlled by nervous centres in the
brain, or solar plexus. It may be caused by irritation of the
nerves of the stomach or other related organs, or by strong
impressions of an unpleasant nature such as an ugly sight or
smell. interference with the sense of balance also has the same
effect, such as travelling in a moving vehicle, or in sea sickness.

Vomiting of watery fluid usually indicates disturbances to
the brain, i.e. brain tumours, but is also found in other condi-
tions such as vomiting in the early months of pregnancy.

Mucus, when vomited in considerable amount in strings, and
especially when sour in taste and brought up in the morning, is
a sign of catarrh of the stomach.

Bile may be brought up by any long-continued attack of
vomiting, after the contents of the stomach has been expeiled
and retching still continues. Usually the bile is golden-yellow.

Vomiting of blood usually indicates some ulceration in the
oesophagus or stomach, and may be red in colour but usually
resembles coffee grounds.

In all cases of vomiting the concomitant symptoms must be
taken into consideration in order to determine the possible
cause.

BELLADONNA

Characteristics
Beiladonna stands for REDNESS — HEAT — INTENSE

BURNING. Great general sensitiveness (to light, motion, noise
or jar). Pains come and go suddenly. Worse lying down.


--- Page 31 ---
THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3 25

Mind:

Flead:
Eyes:
Nose:

Face:
Mouth:

Throat:

Abdomen:

Respiratory:

Skin:
Modalities:

Rage: Delusions ofimaginary animals etc., worse
3 p.m. until midnight.

Conlusion. Pains throbbing, pulsating, darting,
pressive, boring, burning. Worse movement.
worse jar of bed, worse weight of hair and worse
wetting hair.

Tieat and burning; heaviness of eye-lids; dilated
pupils, bloodshot; staring; red.

Fluent coryza of one nostril alternating with
stoppage. Pain as if bruised, sometirnes with
burning.

Burning heat, glowing redness and bloated
appearance. Purple, red, hot.

Great dryness withoui thirst. Accumulation of
saliva, thick viscid.

Very red and dry. Scraping and shooting pain
principai:ly on swallowing, sometimes extending
to ears. Great dryness and Surning. Inflamma-
tion and swelling and sensation of a bmp; con-
stant inclination to swallow.

Tenderness aggravated by the: feast jar in
walking or stepping, or even.afar against the bed
or chair upon which the patient sits or lies; pres-
sure downwards as if the contents of the abdo-
men would issue through the vulva — worse
mornings. With this pressure there is often
associated a pain in the back ‘as if it would
‘break’.

Tenacious mucus in chest; catarrh with cough,
coryza, hoarseness. Loss of voice. Great soreness
in larynx. Dry spasmodic cough.

Very red and hot; burns the hand that touches it;
sweats on covered parts.

Symptoms worse afternoon; 3 p.m., 1] p.m. and
after midnight. Worse touch, motion, noise,
draughts, cold applications, lving down, un-
covering the head.

Kent says “The Belladonna throat burns like.coa!s of fire; the
inflamed tonsils burn like fire. The skin burs like fire to the
patient and is intensely hot to the Doctor. .. Put your hand ona


--- Page 32 ---
26 THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3
Belladonna patient and you want to suddenly withdraw it; the
heat is so intense.”

Remember 8clladonna then, in inflammatory or congestive
conditions — whatever disease name they may have, such as
appendicitis or pneumonia — if the characteristic symptoms of
Belladonna are present this remedy will cure.

Violence is another characteristic. Dr. Tyler says ‘Violence
runs through Belladonna, violence and suddenness. We associ-
_ ate Belladonna in our minds with sudden violence — violent
pain, violent headache, violent throbbing, violent delirium,
violent mania, violent starts and twitchings, violent convul-
sions.’ She goes on “The typical Belladonna picture is unmis-
takable when you meet it; the bright red face, the dilated pupils,
the burning skin, the throbbing pains, the intolerance of
pressure and jar. These call for Belladonna whatever the
disease.”

Belladonna is one of our best remedies in the diseases of
children — the child is often well one minute and sick the next.

Dr. Nash said that he considered Belladonna one of the trio of
delirium remedies with Hyocyamus and Stramonium, and
Belladonna may also be called pre-eminently a head remedy.
He says ‘In inost cases when this remedy is indicated, head
symptoms predominate.’

‘The blood seems to beYushing to the head. The head is hot
while the extremities arc cool. The eyes are red and blood-shot.
The face is also red, almost purple red.’

ARNICA.

Characteristics

Sore, bruised feeling al! over. REMEMBER SORENESS AND
BRUISING — ARNICA. Head and face hot; body and
extremities cold. Recent and remote affections frora injuries.

Removes physical soreness and bruising from soft parts but it
also removes shock caused by accidents and injuries.

This remedy is suited to persons who are extremely sensiuve
to mechanical injuries and who fee! the effects of them lorg
afterwards, and where SORENESS is attached to any
symptom.


--- Page 33 ---
THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3 27

Mind: Patient says he is not ill and demands that the
doctor be sent away.
Head: Pressing pain especially in forehead. Pain as if

nail were driven into brain. Sore bruised feeling.
Pains worse midnight.

Limbs: Sore and bruised feeling worse movement. Body
sore as if pounded, extremely sore to touch the
bed, chair or couch on which the patient sits or
lies feels hard as a rock, causing him to seem
very restless and change position often to get off
the sore parts on which he lies. Backache worse

breathing deeply.
Skin: Black and blue — bruising. Crops of small boils.
Sleep: Sleepless and restless when physically overtired.
Modalities: | Worse cold, damp weather; motion and exertion

ageravates. Better lying down.

HYPERICUM

The characteristic of the Hypericum wounds is that they are
very sensitive to touch.

Injuries to parts rich in sentient nerves; especially fingers,
toes, matrices of nails.

Lacerations when the intolerable pain shows nerves are
severely involved.

Always modifies and sometimes arrests ulceration and
sloughing.

Puncture wounds feel very sore (from treading on nails;
rat-bites etc.). Prevents lockjaw. :

Wounds from crushing, as mashed fingers, especially tips.
Great nervous depression following wounds, and effects or
shock or fright.

Neck and back. After a fall slightest motion of arms or neck
cries; cervical vertebrae very sensitive to touch. Entire spine
tender. Violent pain and inability to walk or stoop after a fall
on coccyx.

Nerves. Prevents lockjaw from wounds in soles of feet, fingers or
palms of hands. Lacerated pains excruciating.

Pains. Lightning pains and electric shocks — if this is allowed


--- Page 34 ---
98 THE LAW OF DIRECTION OF CURE Lesson 3

to goon there is every likelihood of the patient ending up with
tetanus.

TEST PAPER No. 3

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

. Describe briefly the law of Direction of Cure.
. In general when should the higher potencies be used.
. Name the characteristics of Belladonna.

Give two examples when Arnica should be given.

. Give one example when Hypericum should be given.


--- Page 35 ---
Lesson 4
CHRONIC BISEASES

We have dealt with the basic principles of Homoeopathy as
laid down by Hahnemann. With a knowledge of these prin-
ciples much good work can be done. Yet Hahnemann went a
great deal further in the latter part of his life, supplementing his
earlier work by making a deep study of Chronic Diseases.

First let us understand the difference between an acute anda
chronic disease.

Acute:

Those diseases originating from dietary indiscretions, defi-
cient hygiene, physical agents, or bacterial infections. There isa
period of progress and a period of decline, and there is always a
tendency towards recovery. An example of this can be seen in
typhoid, which is due to an acute poison having an evolution
ending in recovery or death. Acute diseases, then, run a definite
course and are of limited duration.

Chronic:

Those diseases caused by infection from various sources
having a period of progress but NO pericd of decline. The vital
force alone is unable to extinguish these diseases — hence they
cease only with the death-of the patient, there being no ten-
dency whatever to recovery unless cured by proper treatment.
Syphilis is an example, its manifestations changing over the
years of the patient’s life, but ever striking deeper towards the
vital organs.

Hahnemann, in his practice, observed that the homoeo-
pathic remedies he was then using were successful in curing the
ailments of many patients, yet after a period of time some
returned with similar symptoms stronger than before. The
disease was in fact progressing.

He states ‘It was a continually repeated fact that the non-

4!


--- Page 36 ---
30 CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4

venereal chronic diseases, after being time and again removed
homoeopathically by the remedies fully proved up to the
present time, always returned in a more or less varied form and
with new symptoms, or reappeared annually with an increase of
complaints. This fact gave me the first clue that the homoeo-
pathic physician . . . has not only to combat the disease present-
ed before his eyes .. . but that he has always to encounter only
some separate fragment of a more deep-seated original disease.’

“He, therefore, must first find out as far as possible the whole
extent of all the accidents and symptoms belonging to the
unknown primitive malady before he can hope to discover one
or more medicines which may homoeopathically cover the
whole of the original disease by means of its peculiar symp-
toms...’

‘But that the original malady sought for must be also of a
miasmatic, chronic nature clearly appeared to me from this cir-
cumstance, that after it had once advanced and developed toa
certain degree it can never be removed by the strength of any
robust constitution, it can never be overcome by the most
wholesome diet and order of life, nor will it die out ofitself. But it
is evermore aggravated, from year to year, through a transition
into other and more serious symptoms, even till the end of
man’s life...”

Hahnemann then, believed that chronic diseases remained in
a latent state in the body, returning from time to time in one
form or another. The manifestations may take on the form ofan
odinary acute illness, but these were in reality only one event in
a suvies; and these diseases could only be cured by a remedy
which covered the whole original disease. For example, an
attack of asthma may look like an isolated event in a patient’s
history, bui on enquiry it will probably be found that the
patient has at some earlier time suffered from a skin eruption.
The asthma and the eruption are both symptoms of the same
disease.

This conclusion was reached by Hahnemann after nearly
twelve years of intensive study and research. For him there were
three sources of chronic infection — Miasms as he called them
— Psora and the two venereal disease Syphilis and Gonorrhoea
which he called Sycosis.

Psora had for its keynote, at some period of the patients


--- Page 37 ---
CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4 31

history, an itch-like eruption. In the case of Syphilis a sequence
of disease manifestations was known to exist and it has since
been proved conclusively that Gonorrhoea similarly attacks the
whole constitution producing a chronic sequence of disease
manifestations.

The three chronic miasms of Hahnemann were then:

Psora: Contracted or inherited constitutional disease
having a non-venereal basis.

Syphilis: The constitutional effects of contracted or in-
herited syphilis.

Sycosis: The constitutional effects of contracted or in-

herited gonorrhoea.

Of Psora, Hahnemann writes: ‘I had come thus far in my
investigations and observations with such non-venereal
patients when I discovered . . . that the obstacle of the cure of
many cases . . . seemed very often to lie in a former eruption of
itch, which was not infrequently confessed; and the beginning
of all the subsequent sufferings usually dated from that time. So
also with similar chronic patients who did not confess such an
infection, or what was probably more frequent, who had, from
inattention, not perceived it or, at least, could not remember it.
After a careful inquiry it usually turned out that little traces of it
(small pustules of itch, herpes, etc.) had showed themselves
with them from time to time, even if but rarely, as an indubit-
able sign of a former infection of this kind.’

“These circumstances, in connection with the fact that in-
numerable observations of physicians, and not infrequently my
own experience, had shown that an eruption of itch suppressed
by faulty practice or one which had disappeared from the skin
through other means was evidently followed, in persons other-
wise healthy by the same or similar symptoms; these circum-
stances, I repeat, could leave no doubt in my mind as to the
internal foe which I had to combat in my medical treatment of
such cases.’

He goes on to describe many ailments known to us by their
pathological names which have their origin in Psora — skin
eruptions, growths, malformations, blood diseases, con-
vulsions, heart-diseases and many others.

He stresses that where eruptions on the skin are suppressed
by any means, the disease strikes inwards producing dangerous


--- Page 38 ---
39 CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4

and often fatal complications, and illustrates his argumeat with
many cases. We give below three of these cases in order that you
may follow the strength of his argument.

‘A man 30 to 40 years of age had been afflicted with the itch a
long time before, and it had been driven away by ointments;
from which time he had become more and more asthmatic. His
respiration became at last, even when not in motion, very short
and extremely laboured, emitting at the same time a continuous
hissing sound, but attended with only little coughing. He was
ordered an injection of one drachm of squills, and to take inter-
nally 3 grains of squills. But by mistake he took the drachm of
squills internally. He was near losing his life with an indescrib-
able nausea and retching. Soon after this the itch appeared
again on his hands, his feet and his whole body in great abun-
dance, and by this means the asthma was at once removed.’

‘A student who had been fora long time afflicted with the itch
drove it off with an ointment, and instead of this there broke out
ulcers on nis arms and legs, and glandular swellings in the arm-
pits. These ulcers were finally cured by external applications
when he was seized with dyspnoea and then dropsy, and from
these he died.’

‘Two youths, brothers, drove off the itch by one and the same
remedy, but they lost all appetite, a dry cough and a lingering
fever set in, they became emaciated and fell into slumbrous
stupor so that they would have died if the eruptions had not
luckily re-appeared on the skin.’

So we see that the nature of these chronic miasms is always to
act in a direction ‘from without inward’ as can be realized very
clearly in syphilis and sycosis from the nature of their con-
traction. Although not. so clearly perceived with psora, the
initial affection is always on the skin where it is easily
suppressed by local treatment. Thus the same inward direction
is again followed.

Having discovered the existence of a chrori?cally operating
poison in the essential character of certain diseases, it was
necessary for Hahnemann to find deep acting remedies which
corresponded in order to obtain complete similarity. These he

named anti-psoric, anti-syphilitic and anti-sycotic and they
had to be:

1. Remedies which acted in the opposite direction to the
chronic disease — from within outward.


--- Page 39 ---
CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson + 33

2. Remedies of a deep-acting nature, i.e. capable of affecting
profoundly the whole organism, both in its metabolic and
physiologic processes, the ‘acute’ remedies acting only in
the sensory and functional sphere.

From this we see that the fourth Law of the Direction of Cure
becomes an essential part of Homoeopathic medicine and
practice.

Read and study Chapter 22 of Roberts’ The Principles & Art of
Cure by Homoeopathy.

Evacuation of the Bowel

Most healthy people have at least one daily movement of the
bowels. But where regular evacuation does not take place a con-
dition of constipation may develop which will result in a state of
auto-intoxication; the body will be poisoned by the accumu-
lation of effete matter. This condition can rapidly become
chronic and give rise to many subsidiary conditions of health.

' The common causes of constipation are:

1]. Habit.

2. A ‘greedy’ colon, i.e. one which absorbs water too quickly.
3. Lack of tone or peristaltic action of the colon muscle.

4. Incorrect diet.

In all cases where constipation is a symptom, careful enquiry
will elicit whether habit or diet is at fault.

A history of haemorrhoids may be disclosed as these are often
complementary to, or a result of, habitual constipation.

In health the normal stool is of dark brown colour, although
ocasionally it may be different according to the nature of the
food previously eaten; for example, sninach will cause the stool
to be dark green. When an excess of cheese or fat has been
taken, the digestive organs may be unable to deal with it, and
much is passed which produces a whitish stool.

Black or slatey stools are produced when certain drugs are
taken in material doses, as for example, iron and bismuth. A
tarry blackness is sometimes imparted when bleeding from the
stomach occurs.

Yellow stools are produced in diarrhoea, when the bile is
passed almost unchanged. Mucus is almost always a sign of
irritation or inflammation in the mucous membrane low down
in the bowel. Red blood signifies some diseased condition situ-


--- Page 40 ---
34 CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4

ated near the lower end of the bowel, e.g. piles. When the blood
proceeds from a point higher up it is changed by the action of
the digestive juices and resembles coffee grounds.

Diarrhoea, or looseness of the bowels is, except in its mildest
forms, a most serious condition. It isa symptom of disease in the
bowels, or other organs such as the liver, kidneys, lungs or
heart, and may be evidence of their dis-function. In such con-
ditions as cholera, dysentry, typhoid, etc., the extent to which
diarrhoea is present is a most important guide to the severity of
the condition.

Flatulence is indicative of weakness of tone or nervous action
in the stomach (if wind is expelled upwards) or in the bowel (if
wind is expelled downwards). Flatulent distention of the abdo-
men in children often indicates the presence of worms.

Unie

Urine is the excretion produced by the kidneys, and consists
chiefly of waste substances resulting from the activity of the
body. The urine and the perspiration are to a great extent inter-
dependent; thus, if the kidneys are acting vigorously, there is
very little perspiration, whilst if there has been much perspira-
tion, as in fevers, the urine is small in amount and highly con-
centrated. When the kidneys are diseased, the sweat glands of
the skin function more freely.

In composition, urine is made up almost entirely of water,
only about 4 per cent being solids in solution. Urea is the most
important of the solids, but there are also minute quantities of
common salt, phosphates and sulphates combined with potas-
sium, sodium, calcium and magnesium.

In health, the urine js of a light colour. In diseases of the
kidneys, such as diabetes and chronic Bright’s disease, the
urine assumes a very pale colour (the same appearance is, of
course, produced after a person has drunk large quantities of
water). When blood is present the colour may be pinkish or
even bright red according to the amount of haemorrhage, and
transparency is lost. Deposits of urates in the urine also give a
deep tint and the urine appears cloudy. Where there is any
involvement of the liver, bile may be passed when the urine
takes on a greenish tint.

The amount of urine passed daily is increased in some diseas-
es notably diabetes and chronic Bright’s disease. Feverish con-


--- Page 41 ---
CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4 35

ditions and heart diseases cause the amount to be less than
normal. Complete stoppage may occur for a time in feverish
conditions of children, but im an adult such a state is very
serious. When the stoppage is due to a blockage of the ureters by
stones, or stricture of the urethra, the secretion by the kidneys
still continuing, the condition is known as retention. When the
stoppage is due to failure of the kidneys to secrete any urine, the
condition is known as suppression or anuria.

Healthy urine has a faint ammoniacal smell, but when it
begins to decompose the smell] greatly increases and becomes
unpleasant. In diabetes the urine has an aroma similar to that
of new mown hay. If such a symptom is noted a Homoeopathic
Physician should be consulted at once.

In healthy urine there is usually a fleecy deposit of mucus
secreted by the mucous membrane of the urinary passages. A
pink or yellow deposit, that settles as soon a the urine begins to
cool which often leaves a stain upon the utensil in which the
urine has stood, is due to urates (uric acid). Uric acid itself,
when present, falls in very scanty yellow or brownish grains. A
white deposit that collects upon the bottom of the utensil after
the urine has stood undisturbed for some time may be due to
phosphates, pus, or debris from diseased kidneys known as.
tube-casts.

Many unusual substances taken into or formed in the bedy
are excreted in the urine. Among these various drugs, disease
poisons, bacteria and parasites, but these can only be traced by
skilled chemists. Important from the diagnostic viewpoint,
how- ever, is the presence in the urine of one of the following: 1)”
Albumen, 2) Blood, 3) Sugar, 4) Pus and Tube-casts, 5) Bile
and 6) Acetone. .

Albumen: Present in most kidney diseases, weakening of the
heart action, during fever, and in severe anaemia.

It should be noted that in young, active persons there is often
a slight degree of albuminaria after exercise, but this is quite
normal and if a specimen of urine is taken after rest, e.g. first
thing in the morning, no albumen is found.

Blood: Found in acute kidney disease, congestion of the kidneys,
or when a stone, ulcer or tumour is present in any of the urinary
organs.


--- Page 42 ---
36 CHRONIC DISEASES | Lesson 4

Sugar: A sign of diabetes mellitus when it is present constantly
in the urine. A diet containing much sugar will cause temporary
passing of sugar, but this is to be expected and is of no conse-
quence.

Pus and Tube-casts: \ndicate inflammation or ulceration
somewhere in the urinary passages. Pus alone generally signi-
fies that the bladder is affected. Tube-casts always point to
involvement of the kidneys.

Bile: Signifies that the bile ducts are obstructed, and bile is
being absorbed into the blood. Usually a degree of jaundice will
be noticeable in the person.

Acetone: May appear in cases of diabetes and general acidosis.

The Appetite

In disease the appetite may become quite depraved with
cravings for particular substances and repugnance to others.
Such cravings and aversions are very important in the evalu-
ation of symptoms from the Homoeopathic point of view.

There are, however, two chief disorders which deserve
special mention, viz: 1) An excessive increase in appetite, and 2)
Diminution or loss of appetite.

Excessive appetite may be a bad habit, due to habitual over-
indulgence in food, leadig to obesity and gouty conditions etc.
Where this is elicited in the case history, the necessary advice
should be given and an attempt made to guide the patient back
to a sensible and more restricted diet. It should be made clear to
the patient suffering from excess weight, caused by over-
indulgence at the table, that he is placing an ever increasing
strain upon his heart and other organs. Often sciatica pains of
great intensity are entirely relieved in obese persons by reduc-
tion of excess weight.

Excessive appetite is sometimes a sign of acid dyspepsia and
diabetes. With the latter there is often an intense thirst and in
spite of the increased intake of food and drink the person
becomes progressively more emaciated. i

Diminished appetite is usually found in all diseases which
cause general weakness, because the activity of the stomach and
the secretion of gastric juices are impaired when vitality is low.
Where the appetite is completely lost but there is a corres-
ponding increase in thirst, fever is usually indicated.


--- Page 43 ---
CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4 37

Thirst

Thirst, like appetite, is instinctive and means that liquid is
necessary for the continuance of bodily activity. In the majority
of cases continued thirst indicates fever or inflammation but it
may be present in other conditions where a considerable
amount of fluid has been lost in the body. Such conditions arise
in complaints such as diarrhoea, or after a severe loss of blood.

Thirst may be experienced in acid conditions such as dys-
pepsia, but usually there will be acid eructations from the
stomach as well.

A desire for water is also a feature of any condition of great
exhaustion.

Should there however, be no apparent cause for great thirst
especially if accompanied by increased heat or dryness of the
skin, it can be inferred that it arises from internal heat and is
consequently a symptom of fever.

ARSENICUM ALBUM

Characteristics
Restlessness. Great and sudden prostration. Intense burning

pains better heat. Intense thirst — drinks often but little at a

time. Generally worse at midnight. From midnight until 2 a.m.

Mind: Very restless and anxious and wants to change
his position frequently. He becomes suddenly
exhausted out of all proportion to the disease.

Head: Pains throbbing and burning, chiefly above one
eye or at root of nose — these are better by cold
applications and walkjng in cool air.

Nose: Fluent discharge which corrodes wings of nose
and burns; nose gets stopped up; worse out of
doors, better in warm room.

Mouth: Dry. Thirst for small drinks but often; worse
during perspiration. Lips parched, dry, cracked,
corroded and burning from fluent coryza.

Throat: Dry, burning, better warm drinks.

Stomach: Very irritable, least food or drink causes dis-
tress and pain. Vomiting and stool simultaneous
worse after eating and drinking. Worse cold
drinks and ice-cream.


--- Page 44 ---
38 CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4

Respiratory: Difficult breathing worse change of weather.
Wheezing. Cannot lie down, must sit up to

breathe.

Chest: Cough with frothy expectoration. Burning in
chest.

Limbs: Pale swellings in joints with burning pains better
heat.

Modalities: | Worse cold air; worse cold and damp and from

cold things and cold applications; worse 12 mid-
night until 2 a.m. Worse noon until 2 p.m. Worse
movement. Better warm air and hot appli-.
cations; pains better sweating.

The Arsenicum patient hugs the fire and loves warm wraps
but he likes his head cold if he has a headache.

No remedy is more restless than Arsenicum. There is restless-
ness with great weakness whereas the Aconite restlessness in
the earlier stages of illness, fevers etc., is not weak.

There is mental restlessness as well as physical, also great
anxiety — and fears — fears of death, that it is useless to take
medicine, that he is incurable. There is dislike of disorder —
fastidious —- described by Dr. Hering as ‘the gold-headed cane
patient’.

Nash says that Arsenicum leads all the remedies for burning
sensations especially in acute diseases — ‘There is hardly an
organ or tissue in the human system where these burnings of
Arsenic are not found’. But the burnings of Arsenicum are

‘improved by heat, i.e. hot applications or heat from the fire or
room etc., and remember that the burning throat of Arsenicum
is relieved by eating and drinking hoz things. There is a burning
sensation throughout with aggravation at midnight.

Arsenicum is thought of in food poisoning as it affects the
alimentary canal from lips to anus.

Lips dry, parched and cracked.

Tongue dry, and red, or red with indented edges — (it can be
white as chalk).

Mouth dry or ulcerated.

Indescribable thirst but can take only a little water at once as
the stomach is so very irritable — the least food or drink causes
pain, distress, vomiting etc., and sometimes vomiting and stool
together. Ice-water and ice-cream particularly disagree.


--- Page 45 ---
CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4 39

in respiratory — there is acute coryza — fluent discharge
which corrodes lips and nose — much burning when lungs are
affected.

Patient cannot lie down.

Affects nervous system — great prostration and charac-
teristic restlessness.

Nash says ‘Arsenic is not a panacea — it must, like every
other remedy be indicated by its similar symptoms or failure is
the outcome. Its great keynotes are restlessness, burning, pros-
tration and midnight aggravation’.

Dr. Tyler says ‘Arsenic is not only acrid to mentality, eating
into rest — hope — security; but all its secretions and dis-
charges are acrid and corrosive. Acrid tears and eye discharges
-—— acrid nasal discharges; acrid leucorrhoea; acrid burning,
corrosive discharges from ulcers which constantly extend in
circumference rather than in depth. Burning pains relieved by
heat. Worse midnight, after midnight and | a.m. specially’.

Kent says ‘From the time of Hahnemann to the present day
this has been one of the polychrests, one of the most frequently
indicated medicines, and one of the most extensively used. . .
Arsenic affects every part of man; it seems to exaggerate or
depress almost all his faculties, to excite or disturb all his
functions . . . it has certain prevailing and striking features.
Anxiety, restlessness, prostration, burning and cadaveric
odours are prominent characteristics. The surface of the body is
pale, cold, clammy and sweating and the aspect cadaveric. The
Arsenicum patient with this mental state is always freezing,
hovers round the fire, cannot get clothing enough to keep warm,
a great sufferer from the cold’. a

CHAMOMILLA

Characteristics

Oversensitive to pain. Restlessness. Turmoil in emree
Uncivil. Spiteful.

This remedy is very useful for children.

Mind: Bad temper and irritability to a degree; does not
know what he wants; a baby asks for a toy and
then hurls it away. Restless. Wants to be carried
around; adults walk the floor in agony, the pain


--- Page 46 ---
40

Head:

Ears:
Face:

Throat:

Respiratory:

Modalities:

CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4

being out of all proportion to the malady. This
patient suffers from the ill effects of bad temper.
Pains throbbing or bursting, worse when think-
ing about them, better by heat. Worse 9 p.m.
until midnight.

Earache which is better by heat.

Often one cheek red and the other pale (especi-
ally in teething children.

Neuralgia worse entering warm room. Tooth-
ache worse entering a warm room, better by
taking cold water into mouth.

Dryness with swelling of tonsils. Spasms in
throat during anger, cannot swallow solids.
Burning heat.

Cough associated with earache, dentition etc.,
hard and dry. Worse 9 p.m. until midnight.
Worse cold damp and windy weather. Chamo-
milla children are worse 9 a.m. Better warm wet
weather and warmth.

Patient is usually chilly, cold and sensitive to cold air and
strong winds which annoy him and aggravate his condition.

Characteristics

LEDUM

Pains begin in feet and travel upwards. Blackeye. Puncture
wounds. Intense coldness.

Eyes:

Limbs:

Black-eye from a blow or contusion. (Note the
200th potency or Ledum 200 should be used for
black-eyes as it is specific).

Gouty pains shoot through foot and limbs and in
joints but especially in small joints; swollen, hot,
pale. Soles painful, can hardly step on them. Pain
starting in foot and travelling up to knee. In
acute rheumatism joints swollen and hot but not
red. Limbs are cold and cannot get warm and are
worse when they do get warm. Swellings are pale
and the pains are worse at night, and from the
heat of the bed. Relief from cold is very marked
and sometimes patients put their feet and legs in


--- Page 47 ---
CHRONIC DISEASES Lesson 4 4]

cold water to ease the pains. Ledum for puncture
wounds such as sticking the garden fork through
the foot or a sharp instrument into the hand. It is
an excellent remedy too for stings (especially
mos- quito stings) and rat bites as these can also
be classed as puncture wounds!

Modalities: Worse warmth and warmth of bed. Worse night.
Better cold and cold applications.

TEST PAPER No. 4

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident th=t the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

]. State briefly the difference between acute and chronic
disease.

2. Name the three chronic miasms.

3. What must be the nature of remedies which can deal
successfully with any of the miasms?

4. Name four characteristics of Arsenicum Album.



--- Page 48 ---
Lesson 5
THE PSORIC MIASM

The word Psora was used widely in Hahnemann’s time for
most of the varied skin troubles known since the earliest times,
and so he did not coin the word but rather gave it a deeper
meaning. We will quote his own words: ‘Psora it is, that oldest,
most universal, most pernicious and yet that least known of
chronic miasmatic disease, which has been deforming and tor-
turing the nations for thousands of years — the oldest history of
the oldest nation does not reach its origin.’

Seven eighths of all chronic maladies prevalent, are ascribed by
Hahnemann to psora — the itch.

He says: ‘It is an internal disease and may exist with or without
an eruption on the skin . . . psora became, therefore, the
common mother of most chronic diseases . . . the eruptions itch
and burn.’

It must be clearly understood, therefore, that psora is an
internal disease and that the skin eruption is the manifestation
of the disease when it is allowed or forced to come to the surface
— and this is the only way it can be eradicated.

Dr. Haehl in The Life of Haknemann says “Yo Hahnemann
psora is the disease or disposition to disease, hereditary from
generation to generation for thousands of years and it is the
fostering soil for every possible diseased condition. At the same
time it is the most infectious of all. Contact with the general
external skin is quite sufficient for transference of the disease in
contrast with sycosis and syphilis, in which cases a certain
amount of friction on the tenderest parts of our bodies, where
most nerves are congregated, and where the cuticle is thinnest,
is requisite for infection. But everyone is exposed to psora
almost under any circumstances.

‘Hereditary transmission for thousands of years, has of
course, generated an increasing number of the forms of disease,
so that their polymorphous symptoms are nowadays almost

42


--- Page 49 ---
THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5 43

innumerable. Hahnemann says that psora, breaking out from
its latent state, can be observed in the most variable forms
imaginable, according to the bodily constitution, the defi-
ciencies of up-bringing, the habits, the mode of occupation and
the external conditions of the individual.

An unusually large number of diseases, stated in the
pathology of the older school to be definitely self-existing, are
simply ‘the characteristic, secondary symptoms of the under-
lying miasmatic malady now coming to light — namely psora,
this thousand headed monster so long undiscovered, so
pregnant with misery.”

Hahnemann’s great principle in the treatment of psora de-
mands that no skin eruption shall be removed by external reme-
dies. For he realised that a skin eruption is not a local disease
but a manifestation of an internal disorder — of unhealthiness
— in fact it is a sign of psora.

He says: ‘If the physician desires to proceed in a conscien-
tious and intelligent manner, no skin eruption whatever its
nature, should be removed by external remedies. The human
skin cannot without the help of the rest of the living body
produce from itself an eruption. It will never become diseased
in any way unless the genera! diseased condition, the abnormal
state of the whole organism, compels it. In every case, an
improper condition of the whole body, of the inner living
organism, is at the root of the trouble and therefore this must
first be considered and should be removed by internal medi-
cines which will alter, improve and cure the whole. Thereupon
the eruption depending for existence on the internal disease, .
will cure itself and disappear — often more speedily than by
external remedies.’ 8: ; /

The remedies which have a pronounced action in combating
this miasm are termed ‘anti-Psoric’ — their favourable action
being demonstrated by the appearance of an eruption or dis:
charge after administration. 2 ; 7

The following is a list of the chief anti-psoric remedies: _

Agaricus Arsenicum alb. Bovista
Alumina Aurum Calcarea carb.
Ammonium carb. _ Baryta carb. Carbo animalis
Ammonium mur. _ Belladonna Carbo veg.

Anacardium Boracic acid Causticum


--- Page 50 ---
44 THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5
Clematis Lycopodium Platinum
Colocynth Magnesium carb. Rhododendron
Conium Magnesium mur. — Sarsaparilla
Digitalis Manganum Senega
Dulcamara Mezereum Sepia
Euphorbium Muriatic acid Silica
Graphites Natrum carb. Stannum
Guaicum Natrum mur. Strontium
Hepar sulph. Nitric acid Sulphur
fodine Petroleum Sulphuric acid
Kali carb. Phosphorus Zincum

Kali nit. Phosphoric acid

The anti-psoric remedies are selected in the usual way
according to the symptoms and given one dose at a time which
must be allowed to work in the body until its action ceases —
and this may take 30, 40 or even 50 days — but the fundamental
Tule is:

“To allow the dose of the medicine, which has been carefully
selected for its homoeopathic suitability according to the
symptoms of the particular case of disease, to have its effect
without interruption as long as it is visibly helping on the cure
and increasing to an appreciable extent the improvement of the
malady.’

Dr. Haehl says: ‘Slight ailments and additional symptoms,
such as headache, stiff neck, slight diarrhoea, etc., which may
occur during the anti-psoric cure, should not induce a j itient to
have instant recourse to other medicines, as the effect of the
anti-psoric may easily be thereby disturted or opposed. Such
symptoms are very often only the consequence of the remedy
acting — a ‘homoeopathic aggravation’ of moderate extent, a
sign of the cure beginning which one may hope with tolerable
certainty to see achieved.’

Symptoms of Psora

Psora manifests itself in any part of the body and in many
ways, but unless combined with one of the other miasms it
never Causes structural changes, its sphere being functional
disturbances. In order to give you a clearer picture of its action
we set out below some of the indications of this miasm:


--- Page 51 ---
THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5 45

Mind: Mental activity, quick, alert, but casily prostrated from
exertion, both mental and physical. A consequent dread of
exertion. Anxiety — fears of death, that health will fail, of being
unable to succeed. Despondency and mental depression.
Thoughts vanish while reading or writing. I[ll-effects from
strong emotions — grief, fear, etc. Restlessness, and often a
longing for travel. Alternating states of gaiety and moodiness.

Head: Vertigo, often specks before the eyes, brought on by
motion, looking up quickly, rising from sitting or lying.
Morning headaches, constantly returning, persistent. frontal
usually. Headaches getting worse during day and improving as
night approaches. Hair dry. lustreless, tangles easily, breaks
and splits easily. Hair falls out after illness. White spots in the
hair. Drv eruptions on the scalp with much itching. Migraine
headaches from emotional disturbances.

Eyes: Not greatly affected by psora. Functional disturbances
only. Intolerance of daylight or sunlight. Spots before the eves.

Nose: Increased sensitivity of smell. Greatly affected by odours
of any kind which produce nausea, headaches. vertigo, etc.

Face: May be pale, sallow, earthy coloured. Lips very red. Skin
usually dry, rough and pimply, having an unwashed or unclean
appearance. Acne. In fevers. often red, hot and shining.

Mouth: Taste sour. sweet, or bitter. Perversions of taste gener-
ally. Thrush and stomatitis. Herpes.

Chest: Dry, teasing. spasmodic coughs. Functional disturbances *
of the heart. Violent palpitations with beating of the whole
body. Band sensations about the chest. Neuralgic pains abaut
the heart.

Stomach: Always hungry, even with a full stomach. Craving tor
sweets, acids, sour things. Weak. all-gone sensations. Hunger at
night. Hunger and all-gone sensation between 10 a.m. and 1!
a.m. Greasy foods aggravate although craved. Prefers hot food.

Abdomen: Flatulence, distention. rumbling, worse at night.

‘Flabby muscles. Cannot tolerate pivss ire. Abdominal swmp-

toms better fron) heat.

Urine: Involuntary passing of urine when suctzing, coughing.

or laughing. Smarting and burning after urinating. ‘


--- Page 52 ---
46 : THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5

Stool: Diarrhoeas induced by over-eating, anticipation, usually
worse early morning. No desire for stool. Stoo! dry, scanty,
hard, and difficult to expel. Alternation between constipation
and diarrhoea. Pin-worms.

Skin: Appears unwashed, and no amount of washing seems to
improve it. Dry, rough, dirty, or unhealthy looking. Pruritis.
Eruptions worse in open air, better at night. Dry scaly, erup-
tions. Great itching, with little suppuration.

Extremities: Neuralgic pains. Hands and feet dry, hot, with
burning sensations in palms and soles.

Modalities: Worse —- sunrise to sunset, after eating, heat of
room, standing, approach of menses, new moon. Better — lying
down and being quiet (this is an outstanding characteristic in
most complaints), heat slow movement, weeping, diarrhoeas,
perspiration, urinating.

Generals: Functional disturbances. Weak and debilitated
persons. Dropsical symptoms. Coldness in most ailments. Easy
fatigue. The ‘great unwashed’.

Read and study Chapters 23, 24 and 25 of Roberts’ The
Pnnctples and Art of Cure by Homoeopathy

EXPECTORATION

Expectoration varies considerably in character according to
the diseases with which it is associated.

An important consideration is the case with which the
sputum is expectorated’ Where it is expelled by an effort, such
as repeated hawking or coughing, or where there is more or leas
acute pain or soreness in the effort to detach it, a continued
irritation and obstruction of the air-cells and passages is evi-
denced. On the other hand, when the sputum is discharged
with ease, there is no pain, and great relief is experienced, it Is
an indication that the acute stage of any inflammatory con-
dition of the throat or lungs has passed. The appearance of the
expectoration at this time may be of a thick yellowish nature,
occasionally modified by a few slight streaks of blood.

At the beginning of inflammatory conditions, suck as acute
bronchitis or inflammation of the throat, there may be muc’

_———_


--- Page 53 ---
THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5 : 47
v cough yet little expectoration. The cough is usually painful and
dry. During the greater part of an attack of acute ‘bronchitis,
particularly in old people. the expectoration is of a watery,
frothy character and is brought up in considerable quantities.

Where the sputum appears jelly-like or sticky and is tinged
with a ‘rusty’ colur, a severe inflammation of the lungs is indi-
cated. This type of expectoration is found when the patient is
suffering from pneumonia and often the sputum in this disease
is so sticky that it adheres to the vessel into which it is expector-
ated, even when the latter is turned upside down.

Haemoptysis, or bleeding from the lungs, is an extremely
serious condition and medical aid must be sought immediately.
Usually, it indicates pulmonary tuberculosis or carcinoma of
the lung.

Tt should be bore in mind, however, that spitting of blood
may be due merely to a bleeding from the nose when the blood
has run into the throat; or to the rupture ofa smail vessel on the
wall of the throat when this part of the air passage is inflamed.

Bleeding from the stomach is different from Haemoptysis as
it is usuatly dark brown and granular in appearance. It should
be noted that blood from the stomach is always vomtted and
results generally from some ulcerated or congested state.

Expectoration like ‘prune juice’ occurring in the course of
pneumonia is an ominous sign, and usually indicates that
softening of parts of the lungs has begun.

A yellow, bitter-tasting expectoration indicates an affection
of the liver.

THE TONGUE

Many of the most important indications associated with
derangement of the digestive functions can be observed from
the state of the tongue. In health the surface of the tongue
should be smooth with a slight groove in the middle. The edge
of the tongue should be sharp and even. tis under the control of
the will and can be moved in any direction. +

Where the tongue Is flabby, large and pale, and shows" ‘teeth
marks along its edge, a condition of general debility in the
muscular system is indicated.

Tremulousness when the tongue is protruded is indicative of


--- Page 54 ---
AB THE PSORIC MIASM = Lesson 5

a nervous condition usually found in persons who indulge too
heavily in alcoholic drinks; a symptom of considerable import-
tance, as it may be the only sign of this weakness.

Dryness of the tongue points to diminished secretion, and is
common in acute and inflammatory diseases.

In eruptive fevers a very red tongue is often observed. In
gastric and bilious fevers, and in severe indigestion, the redness
may be limited to the edges and tip.

In scarlet fever there is often seen what is called a ‘Strawberry
Tongue’, the general surface being covered with a white fur,
through which project the red and inflamed points of the larger
papillae with which the tongue is studded.

Thickly furred, dirty white, and possibly slimy indicates
derangement of the lining membrane of the stomach. Where the

fur is ofa yellowish colour, the liver is also possibly involved.

Where the tongue shows white patches interspersed with
sharply marked red, bare areas, the condition is known as a
mapped or ‘geographical tongue’. It is a mild form of inflam-
mation in which the surface layer of the mucous membrane on
the tongue peels off, and it is usually associated with digestive
- disorders and a degree of general debility.

In all complaints the gradual cleaning of the tongue, first
from the tip and edges, shows a tendency to health and indi-
cates a general cleansing of the whole alimentary tract.

: SULPHUR

Sulphur is one of the greatest ‘polychrests’ (drugs of many
uses) and is Hahnemann’s Prince of ‘antipsorics’. Hahnemann
says of Sulphur: “The homoeopathic physician (who alone acts
in conformity with natural laws) will meet many important
morbid states for which he will discover and may expect much
asistance in the symptoms of Sulphur and Hepar Sulphuris’.

Kent says ‘Sulphur is suck. a full remedy that it is somewhat
difficult to tell where to begin. It seems to contain a likeness of
all the sicknesses of man, and a beginner on reading over the
proving of Sulphur might naturally think that he would need no
other remedy, as the image ofall sickness seems to be contained
in it,

“The Sulphur patient is a lean, lank, hungry, dyspeptic fellow


--- Page 55 ---
THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5 49

with stoop shoulders, yet many times it must be given to fat,
rotund, well-fed people. The angular, lean, stoop-shouldered
patient, however, is the typical one, and especially when he has
become so from long periods of indigestion, bad assimilation
and feeble nutrition. ‘he Sulphur state is sometimes brought
about by being long housed up and adapting the diet to the
stomach. Persons who lead sedentary lives, confined to their
rooms in study, in meditation, in philosophical inquiry, and
who take no exercise, soon find out that they must eat only the
simplest of foods, foods not sufficient to nourish the body, and
they end up by going into a philosophical mania . . . another
class of patients in whom we see a Sulphur appearance in the
face; dirty, shrivelled, red-faced people. If it be a child, the
mother may wash the face often, but it always looks as if it had
been perfunctorily washed. The Sulphur scholar, the inventor.
works day and night in threadbare clothes and battered hat: he
has long, uncut hair and a dirty face: his study is uncleanly, itis
untidy; books are piled up indiscriminately; there is no order. ft
seems that Sulphur produces this state of disorder . . . unctean-
liness, a state of ‘don’t care how things go,’ and a state of
selfishness. He becomes a false philosopher . . . disappointed
because the world does not consider him the greatest man on
earth ... he has on a shirt that he has worn many wecks: if he
has not a wife to attend to him, he would wear his shirt until it
fell from him’.

Nash says: ‘No remedy has more general, positive and persis-
tent action upon the skin than Sulphur. With or without erup-
tion, itching and burning are the characteristic sensations
attending the skin symptoms. if any one doubts the itch-pro-
ducing power of Sulphur, Iet him work a day or two in the
bleaching room ofa broom factory. | have tried this experiment
and we all remember the fact that our mothers and grand-
mothers used to cure or rather over-cure itch with it. So strong
is the affinity of Sulphur for the skin that it seems bent on
pushing everything internal out on the surface. Especially is
this true if it is something that naturally belongs there.’

The full use of Sulphur can only be appreciated when one
realizes the true implications of Psora but one must also remem-
ber that Sulphur is not the only anti-psoric remedy,

However, as Nash says ‘it may be as well to speak of the
pewer possessed by Sulphur of arousing or exciting defective


--- Page 56 ---
50 THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5

reaction. Your former remedy was well chosen and seemed to
help in a measure, but the case relapses, lingers or progresses
slowly to perfect recovery. It ison account of a depression of the
vital force, as Hahnemann would call it. It may be on account of
psora or not. Now give a dose of Sulphur and let it act for a few
hours if in an acute case, or a number of days if chronic. Then
you may return to your former remedy and get results which
you could not before the Sulphur was given. It clears up the case
and prevents its becoming chronic or a lingering unsatisfactory
convalescence.’

Characteristics
Extremely red orifices, especially lips as if painted red.
Empty, gone, faint, hungry sense at pit of stomach around I]
a.m. must have something to eat or drink. Offensive odour of
body despite frequent washing. Aversion to bathing; it aggra-
vates. Burning heat on top of head, of palms, and especially of
soles of feet at night in bed, must put feet out of bed to cool them
off. Worse standing. Fluids all burn parts over which they pass.
Mind: Easily angered; fault finding; irritable; restless
and quarrelsome. Foolish happiness and pride,
thinks he has the best of everything. Hates to
either work or be washed. Always theorising.
Wants to know the why and wherefore of every-
thing. Dwells on useless speculation.

Head: Headache every Sunday.

Eyes: Lids very red.

Ears: Very red.

Mouth: Lips very red.

Stomach: Worse 11 a.m. (Sinking, all gone faint hungry
feeling.) Craves sweets.

Anus: Very red.

Skin: Itching better scratching and then it burns.

Modalities: | Worse standing: worse 11 a.m. in a close room;

open air; bathing; cold damp weather. Better
doors and windows open: sitting or lying.

Sulphur, Calcarea and Lycopodium are the trio of remedies
on which the whole of the Materia Medica is based.

If you have a patient suffering from any named ailment and
he exhibits three or more of the characteristics of sulphur, then


--- Page 57 ---
THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 3 5]

you can prescribe it with confidence — i.e. burning, redness,
itching, offensive odours, unkempt and unclean, worse | 1 a.m.
and worse standing.

CALCAREA CARBONICA

This is the trituration of the middle layer of the oyster shell.

The sweats are general — night sweats and on exertion
especially on head. neck and chest — this often applies to
children.

The skin is white, watery or chalky, pale — and the dis-
position torpid and sluggish or slow in movement.

Sulphur Calcarea, and Lycopodium are a trio of remedies
that should be studied and compared. Note the sluggish or slow
movements of Calc. carb. and the almost opposite quick, wiry
nervous active movements of Sulphur; then again there is none
of the bilious swarthy yellowish appearance in Calc. carb. that
we find in Lycopodium.

From Hering’s: ‘Guiding Symptoms’ we quote “Tardy
development of the bony tissues with lymphatic enlargements.
Curvature of the bones especially spine and long bones.
Extremities deformed, crooked. Soft@ing of the bones,
fontanels remain open too long, and skull very large.’

Nash says that Calcarea shows the lack of or imperfect nutr-
tion of bones. Whilst they are not nourished evenly or properly
the soft parts are suffering from over nutrition and thus we get
soft flabby people especially in children and young people.

The sensation of coldness is a characteristic of Calcarea —
the opposite to the burning of Sulphur. There are partial sweats
— in all sweatings of Calcarea the surface of the skin is
characteristically cold.

The digestive tract is sour — there are sour eructations sour
vomiting, sour diarrhoea, sour mucus and sour smell of whole
body. The diarrhoea is worse in the afternoon. The patient is
usually better when constipated.

Dr. Tyler says “The fat, flabby child is brought in and
dumped down on toa chair and sits there. No wriggling down to
wander about and touch everything in the room. She sits there,
lethargic and dull. Perhaps plays with her fingers and picks


--- Page 58 ---
52 THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5

them. With the chalky complexion goes — fatness without fit-
ness — sweating without heat — bones without strength and
tissue of plu$ quantity and minus quality. More flabby bulk
with weariness and weakness. In Calc. everything is slow and
late and heavy and weak’.

Kent says that Calc children have dreadful times in their
dreams and in an adult you can often recognise Calcarea by the
limp, cold moist handshake.

FEARS — that something is going to happen to herself or
somebody else — that she will lose her reason, and people will
notice — that people will notice her confusion of mind. Fearful-
ness with restlessness and vague fears — fears of death. Broods
over Jittle things of no importance — peevish, fretful — obstin-
ate. Calcarea is a very tired patient.

Kent says ‘It is a peculiar feature of Calcarea that the more
marked the congestion of internal parts, the colder the suriace
becomes. With chest troubles, the stomach troubles, and bowel
troubles, the feet and hands become like ice, and covered with
sweat; and he lies in bed sometimes with a fever in the rest of the
body, and the scalp covered with cold sweat. That is strange.
You cannot account for that by any reasoning in pathology, and
when a thing is so strange that it cannot be accounted for, it
becomes very valuable as descriptive of the remedy, and is one
that cannot help but be of value when prescribing for the
patient.’

The headaches begin in occiput and spread to top of head
and are so severe that they feel as if they will burst.

Calcarea is the chronic of Belladonna — i.e. when Bella-
donna has again and again helped the acute condition Calcarea
will be curative and so prevent its recurrence.

Characteristics
Coldness, general and local, subjective and objective.
Sweats, especially about head, feet and hands. Head covered
with cold sweat when other parts of body are comfortable.
Sweats even in cold room and in cold air. Sweats on face when
nowhere else. Feet sweat on becoming very cold or very warm.
Fearful. Sensitive to cold and damp weather but patients
cannot sit in the sun. Feels as though he has on damp stockings.
Mind: Very fearful and apprehensive — FULL OF
FEARS. Melancholy. Depressed. Mentally and


--- Page 59 ---
THE PSORIC MIASM = Lesson 5 53

physically always tired.

Head: Profuse cold sweat (often to be found in babies
and pillow is soaked.) Sweat from least exertion.
Pain as if in vice. Congestion of head.

Face: Chalky, white, bloodless.

Mouth: Unpleasant taste mostly sour. Sour risings.
Desires strange food, limes, slate pencils, eggs,
earth, chalk, clay, raw potatoes, swects, ice-
cream.

Stomach: Sinking empty sensation at any time. Vomit
sour.

Respiratory: Breathless worse ascending. Cough with expec-
toration of thick, grey mucus — sour.

Chest: Congestion. Shortness of breath. Oppression of
chest. Anxious feeling in chest.

Neck and Glands under the lower jaw tender, worse

Back: moving jaw; worse touch.

Limbs: Pain in joints worse on becoming cold; worse

cold wet weather; worse cold wind. Numbness of
legs worse evening. Cramps worse 3 a.m. Stiff-
ness worse night. Feet and legs cold and clammy
(sensation as if in damp stockings). Hands cold
and clammy — (handshake feels boneless, moist
and cold).

Modalities: | Worse cold; cold damp; worse change of weather
especially to damp, it goes right through them;
worse draughts, from working in water and bath-
ing; worse full moon; after midnight and early
morning; on awakening.

These patients are very chilly and dread the open air; they
are sensitive to cold damp air and to draughts. They catch cold

very easily.


--- Page 60 ---
54 THE PSORIC MIASM Lesson 5

TEST PAPER No. 5

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

1. How would you expect a psoric disease to respond to
Homoeopathic treatment?

2. If a patient complained of a skin eruption what advice
would you give him and what other conditions would you
expect to find?

3. Describe an imaginary child who would respond, in your
opinion, to a dose of Sulphur


--- Page 61 ---
Lesson 6
THE SYPHILITIC MbQGM

Syphilis is a comparatively modern diwease, but is the basis of
many constitutional troubles. Let us first consider the con-
traction of the disease and its effects on the body. In
Hahnemann’s words — ‘In impure coition the specific infection
probably takes place instantaneously at the point of contact and
friction.

‘When the infection has taken hold, the whole living body is
overcome with it. Directly after the moment of infection the
formation of venereal disease begins in the whole of the
interior... It is only after this penetration of the evil received
into all the organs, only when the transformation of the whole
man into a venereal subject . . . is complete. . . that the morbid
state tries to ease and to palliate the internal evil by producing a
local symptom (called a chancre) which first appears as a blister
and then breaks out into a painful sore.”

We are not concerned in the primary contraction of syphilis.
But we ave concerned with the effects of the disease which have
filtered down through generations affecting the constitutions of
the children.

What are these effects? Syphilis is a deadly poison once
driven internally, eating into the system, destroying certain
constituent elements in tissues and altering the structure of
bones and ligaments. In the first generation the off-spring of
parents suffering from the disease show deep constitutional
faults such as deformities and malformations, chronic catarthal
conditions, ulcers etc. The primary symptoms of the disease are
not so apparent in the off-spring, the internal organs of the
parents having already been contaminated by the disease.

In the second, and succeeding generations, these various
manifestations gradually lose their major proportions and a
tendency towards normality is observed. That this corrective
process is a natural law can be demonstrated in other forms of
life. For instance, artificially produced strains of flowers always

55


--- Page 62 ---
ist} THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6

tend to ‘throw-back’ to their natural form, and itis a comforting
thought that even the deadliest of man’s diseases will tend to die
out over the course of time, providing no other miasm Has been
introduced. It should be realised that rarely is one miasm alone
active in a person, each of us inheriting the constitutional faults
of both paternal] and maternal] ancestors.

In order to obtain a camposite picture of the: effects of
syphilis, let us study some of the manifestations.

The chief characteristics are:

1. Deformed or altered construction
2. Indurations and ulcerations, and
3. A nightly aggravation ofall complaints.

Mind: The person is slow of comprehension, sullen,
stupid, easily angered, suspicious. Dread of the
night. Obstinacy. eeps his troubles to himself.
Gets fixed ideas which no amount of reasoning
wil remove. Mental troubles relieved by the
breaking out ofan ulcer, Sag om ane Extreme
tvpes — criminals, sadist

flead: Dull and heavy pea ries usually commencing
at the base of the head. These are sometimes
one-sided, always worse at night, and getting

: better as morning approaches. Large heads, with
profuse perspiration, giving off an unpleasant
odour. Moist eruptions with yellow pus. Hair
falls out in handfuls leaving bare spots,
commencing at the vertex. Matted hair, smelling

badly. .

Eyes: Malformation of eyeball. Ulcerations and
inflammations. Dread of artificial light.

Ears: Abscesses. Discharges from the ear. Meningeal
troubles.

Nose: Snuffles. Ulceration: Dark, greenish, black or
brown crusts. Destruction of nasal bones.

Face: Greyish, greasy appearance. Decp fissures in the
lips. Children look old puckered, dried up, like
old men.

Mouth: Ulcers. Deformed teeth, decaying early. Upper

and lower jaw out of alignment.
Stomach: Aversion to meat. Desires cold food and drink.


--- Page 63 ---
THE SYPHILITIC MIASHiS Lesson 6 57

Many disturbances caused by too rich a diet.

Chest: Changes in the structure of the chest.
Abdomen: Sudden and severe diarrhoeas. j
Skin: Eruptions about joints, flexures of the body, and

arranged in circular groupings. Copper coloured
or raw-ham colour. Thick and heavy scales.
Varicose ulcers are the last destructive mani-
festations on the skin. Ecchymoses and haemorr-
hagic conditions,

Generals: Destruction of uissue. The periosteum and long
bones especially attacked. Growing pains in
children. All complaints worse at night and at
the approach ofstorms.

Hahnemann gave one remedy as being absolutely curative of
uncomplicated Syphilis — Mercury. He emphasized that it
should he ‘the smallest dose of the best mercurial preparation.’
Such symptoms as we shall observe, however. will be altered in
character as we are endeavouring to recognise the inherited taint
only. Many remedies may therefore be indicated according to
the constitutional background of each individual, but these
remedies will fall into the group of deep-acting remedies as
Calc. fluor., Aurum., Acid fluor., Kali bich., etc.

Read and study Chapters 26, 27 and 28 of Roberts’ The
Principles and Art of Cure by Homoeopathy
The Sycotic Miasm -

Sycosis, the ‘fig-wart’ disease. is the after effects of suppressed
gonorrhoeal poison. When gonorrhpea has been naturally
treated and thoroughly and completely cured, sycosis rarely
dev elops. When, however, gonorrhoea has been suppressed
and its poisons driven back into the system, the full destructive
nature of the disease becomes apparent.

The first symptoms after suppression usually appear in
anaemia and inflammatory conditions of anv part of the body.
Later symptoms take on many forms, but sycotic mani-
festations generally tend to infiltration and over-growth of
tissue — warts and warty growths, deposits in the joints and
tissues leading to rheurnatic complaints, thickening of the skin
and nails. The pelvic and sexual organs especially are attacked
by this miasm.


--- Page 64 ---
58 We THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson

This sycotic poison can be handed on. It is, however, not
transmitted in its original form; the symptoms passed on are
those which are manifest at the time of the transmission.
Where, for example, a healthy woman marries'a man who has
suffered from gonorrhoea, which has been supposedly ‘cured’, it
has been found that the woman’s health begins to deteriorate
and secondary symptoms begin to appear similar to those
mentioned above. Children born to such a union inherit the
taint, and again show similar symptoms. Thus the suppressed
gonorrhoeal poison is handed down from father to son. in many
patients, traces of the inherited disease may be observed, and
these can only be eradicated by correctly chosen anti-sycotic
remedies.

It has also been observed that when a person has been vac-
cinated repeatedly similar symptoms manifest themselves. [t is
interesting to note that the manner of infection is similar to that
of the miasms, viz: Infection takes place the moment the
vaccine enters the blood stream. Then follows the period during
which the whole organism is infected, when there is a more or
less vigorous reaction and an attempt by the vital force to throw
the poison out at the place of entry. Then the struggle ceases
and the body accommodates itself to the intruder. In re-
vaccination the body often has no further resistance to offer but
suffers the additional weight of poison material silently and it is
assumed that the vaccination ‘did not take’! Yet later,
symptoms begin to appear similar in character to the true
sycotic poison, and only by skilful treatment can this des-
tructive tendency be halted, and the sick person brought back
to health.

In modern times, therefore, sycosis has taken on a doubie
meaning, i.e. the morbid conditions develop as a result of:

1. Inherited gonorrhoea! poison, or

2. Repeated vaccination.

Hahnemann’s remedies for sycosis were Thuja and Nitric
Acid. He states: ‘Both the gonorrhoea and the excrescences of
sycosis are cured in the most durable way by the internal
administration of a few globules of Thuja, which should be
allowed to act for 15, 20, 30 or 40 days. After this you may give
an equally small dose of Nitric Acid, letting it act for a like
period. These two remedies are sufficient to cure both the
sycosis and the excrescences. In inveterate cases the larger


--- Page 65 ---
THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6

excrescences may be touched once a day with the fresh jue

Thuja, diluted with equal parts of alcohol.’

As in syphilis, however, in the treatment of inherited sycosis,
many remedies may be indicated and the prescription must be
based on the totality of the symptoms. Where this disease is
recognised it is, nevertheless, often found of great value to give a
dose of Thuja 200 in order to ‘clear the way’ for the indicated

remedy.

Some of the chief indications of the sycotic miasm are as

follows:
Mind:

Head:

Nose:

Mouth:
Face:

Chest:

Stomach:

Abdomen:

Female:

Cross, irritable. Worse when the weather
changes. Fixed ideas. Jealousy and suspicion.
Forgets recent events, but remembers old events
quite clearly. Selfcondemnation. Suicidal. Dege-
nerates. All mental conditions better on re-
appearance of a discharge or other elimination.
Headaches at vertex or frontal. Worse at or after
midnight. Headache always better from motion.
Vertigo at base of the brain. Hair falls out in
circular spots.

Red and studded with capillaries. Sense of smell
lost. Discharge with odour of fish-brine. Snuffles
in children. Yellowish green catarrh. Cannot
breathe through the nose owing to accumulation
of mucus.

Musty or fishy taste.

Congested, blue. Warty eruptions. Hair of beard

. falls out.

Violent hammering of the heart with other com-
plaints. Heart pains betfer by gentle exercise.
Pain from shoulder to heart with rheumatic con-
ditions.

Worse after eating, pain relieved by lying on
stomach. Crampy or colicky pains, better from
hard pressure. Fond of beer. rich foods, fat
meats, highly seasoned foods.

Pains better hard pressure, bending double.
Colic. Appendicitis and peritonitus.

Ovarian inflammation, uterine disorders, cysts.
Catarrhal discharges, yellowish-green, with fish-
brine odour. Colic with menses. Leucorrhoea


--- Page 66 ---
60 THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6

thin, scanty, acrid, producing biting or itching
and burning of the parts.

Stool: Fluent, forceful diarrhoea preceded by colic.
Acid, corrosive.
Skin: Warts and warty growths. Moles. Wine coloured

patches. Nails ribbed, ridged, thick, and heavy.
Barbers itch.

Extremities: | Rheumatic conditions. Tearing in joints, worse
during rest, cold damp weather. Better moving
or stretching and in dry weather. Pain in small
joints with infiltration and deposits. Pains worse
at approach of storm.

Generals: Inflammatory rheumatism of soft tissues.
Slowness of recovery. General relief by dis-
charges. Pains alternate with discharges.
Neuralgias. Fish-brine odour of all discharges.
Greenish or greenish-yellow discharges. Suscep-
tibility to rheumatic conditions. Arthritis de-
formans, with deposits of lime salts.

Illustration of Sycotic Miasm

This brings to mind the patient who came for treatment with
gout. After eating the smallest portion of meat the big toe on the
left foot would become inflamed and extremely painful — it
would wear off in two or three days ifno more meat was taken.

On taking the totality of the symptoms it was found that
Urtica Urens was needed and although three doses in the 30th
potency were given, her condition was improved but not cured.

On careful consideration it was realised that gout is a disease
that is nearly always traced back to the sycotic miasm and a unit
dose of Medorrhinum 200 was given as it was revealed that asa
child she had chronic catarrh (which she had ‘grown out of)
and also she had a wart on her check.

After a week her symptoms still called for Urtica Urens and
this was then given — one dose in the 200th potency. This was
six years ago and although this woman now cats meat in normal
quantities she has never had a return of gout.

The remedy medorrhinum used in this case is known as a
‘nosode’.

Read and study Chapters 29 and 30 of Roberts’ The Principles
and Art of Cure by Homoeopathy.


--- Page 67 ---
THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6 6]
PAIN

Among the many symptoms of disease, the symptoms of pain
are perhaps the most frequently complained about. The
student will have learnt in previous lessons, that it is on the
totality of symptoms that a Homoeopathic remedy is prescribed,
and not on any one particular affection or indication of disease;
nevertheless the repeated complaints of sick people in regard to
their aches and pains cannot and must not be entirely dis-
regarded and we are therefore devoting some time to a closer
examination of this distress signal, for such it most certainly is.
Pain is always an indication of some greater disharmony and
care should be taken to record its exact nature.

Pain is a single symptom. It is nota reliable guide toa remedy
but must be taken into consideration with other symptoms to be
of value. It must be borne in mind that we have no way of
measuring pain but must estimate the patient’s tolerance of it.
This is often referred to as the patient’s ‘threshold’ of discom-
fort. What is severe pain to a sensitive, nervous, or exhausted
person, might be mere discomfort to one who is habitually
phlegmatic, or in robust health.

Generally pain is described in various ways by each patient,
but it is helpful to remember that the sensation produced in the
majority of persons in various conditions comes under several
main groupings as follows:

Throbbing: Usually indicates an inflammatory condition, and
where the affection is serious the pain may be severe. Inflam-
mation usually produces an uninterrupted pain in a localised
area and is worse by pressure.

Boring: Often indicates pressure, ulceration or inflammatory
conditions. Where bone is affected the pain may be excruciating
in character.

Gnawing: The pain of a stomach ulcer is often described in this
way but the expression is usually found in association with the
growth of tumours and great care should be taken where this
symptom is given.

Aching, bruised, stiff: This may be simply the after-effect of the
over-use of a muscle. In well established cases of stiffness with
aching actual deposits in the tissues of fatigue products may be
present. Rheumatism deposits cause similar symptoms usually


--- Page 68 ---
62 THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6

localising in a particular joint or muscle.

Griping, colicky: Irritation of such organs as the bowels, bile-
ducts, bladder or ureters will cause this type of pain, the patient
usually being compelled to double up in order to obtain relief.

Burning: Often descriptive of dyspeptic pains caused by an
excess of acid in the gastric juices irritating the nerve endings in
the stomach membrane.

Shooting: Usually indicates that pain is travelling along the
course of a nerve. It can, therefore, be assumed that there is
some irritation ofa nerve in the stated area.

The above definitions are necessarily brief and one must
learn to interpret the statement of the patient in his description
of the pain which he is suffering. Inflammation usually causes a
pain which is continuous in a specified area and is worse by
pressure. Where pain runs ina particular direction and appears
worse from slight touch, but is ameliorated from heavy
pressure, It is nervous in character. Pain which comes and goes
in the same part or parts and is cramp-like or constrictive in
character, relieved by warmth or pressure, indicates spasm of
the part affected.

Observation of the part is often of assistance in confirming
the nature of the pain. For instance, where the pain is caused by
inflammation there will be increased heat of the whole body —
fever, high pulse rate and severe thirst. Nervous pains are
always of an irregular nature — darting, dragging, pulsating,
shooting — and there may be an increase of heat along the
course of the affected nerve. But the person will be holding the
part tightly, or sitting in, such a way as to exert pressure on the
nerve. Spasmodic pains such as colic, cause the person to
double up by the severity of the contraction — but feverish
symptoms will be unlikely.

Remember, however, our opening remarks on the nature of
pain. Always pay close attention to the complementary symp-
toms before deciding on the type of pain presenced in any case.

THE PULSE

Pulse readings provide a quick estimate of the genera!
condition of the patient and the state of his circulation, i.e. if


--- Page 69 ---
THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6 63

strong, full and hard an inflammatory condition is present.

The term ‘The pulse’ refers to the pulse wave of the radial
artery which, because of its superficial position and easy
accessibility is the one usually felt with the fingers. The wave is
not a forward movement of a column of blood but is actually an
advancing wave produced by blood being ejected into the aorta
independent of the speed of the blood flow.

Reading the Pulse:

The patient should be at ease both mentally and physically.
Anything which tends to excite the action of the patient’s heart
defeats the object in view.

Three fingers are placed upon the radial artery (inner side of
the wrist) with the thumb on the opposite side. A variation in
the degree of pressure will indicate the nature of the beats, i.e.
soft, full, hard. The number of beats per minute are carefully
counted.

Normal Pulse:

The healthy pulse is uniform, equal, moderately full. and
swelling slowly under the fingers. It is smaller and quicker in
women and children and in old age the pulse becomes hard
owing to increased firmness or to structural change in the
arterial coats.

The average number of beats per minute are as follows:

Birth 140 Infancy 120—130 Childhood 100
Youth 90 Adults 75 Old age 65—70
Senility 73—80

These readings are for the average person. Various circum-
stances will affect the readings considerably, viz: after exercise
or excitement the pulse is quicker. The readings are faster when
the person is standing rather than sitting and faster sitting than
lying. As a result of cold, sleep. fatigue or want of food the
readings will be slower.

Regular pulse readings in acute cases help to determine the
degree of progress made by the disease upon the vital force, and
consequently the seriousness of the illness is more easily
assessed. :

“A number of varying titles have been given to the charac-


--- Page 70 ---
64 THESYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6

teristics observed in reading the pulse, the following being those
generally in use:

Full: Occurs in plethoric conditions or in the early stages of
acute diseases.

Weak: Feeble conditions of the system.

Rapid: If strong, full and hard it indicates inflammation or fever.
Ifsmall and very rapid it points to a stage of great debility.

Jerking: A quick rather forcible beat, followed by a sudden,
abrupt cessation, as if the dizection of the wave of blood has
been reversed. Heart disease ts usually indicated.

Intermittent: A pulsation is occasionally omitted, frequently
owing to some obstruction in the circulation in the heart and
lungs. It may also be observed in some forms of valvular
diseases of the heart and in apoplexy. Prolonged over-exertion,
anxiety, or flatulence may produce it. Often a symptom of a
gouty constitution.

Note: In acute diseases an unequal or changeable pulse denotes
the complaint as nervous in origin and not inflammatory. Thus
although the pains complained of, even throbbing, may seem to
indicate inflammation, if the pulse is unequal the trouble may
be spasmodic or neuralgic.

THUJA

This remedy is Hahnemann’s chief anti-sycotic, and it is
given to patients who frequently say ‘I have never been well
since vaccination’. Q

Modalities — worse cold, damp air, after vaccination, exces-
sive tea drinking, extension of limbs; better drawing up limbs.

The mental symptoms are curious — patient thinks that the
body and particularly the limbs are made of glass and will
readily break. When walking he feels as though his legs are
made of wood. He feels as though a living animal were in the
abdomen. Full of fixed ideas. Makes mistakes in speaking and
writing — speaks slowly and has prolonged thoughtfulness
about the merest trifles.

There is a great deal of croaking, rumbling and grumbling in


--- Page 71 ---
THE SYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6 65

abdomen as of an animal crying. The abdomen is puffed and
big.

Chronic constipation with hard, black large stools, or diarr-
hoea — forcibly expelled, copious gurgling like water from a
bung hole of a barrel — diarrhoea especially from effects of
vaccination.

One ofits black letter symptoms is ‘on exposure of the body to
warm air, shivering all over’. Rigor with much yawning, the
warm air feels cold to him and the sun seems to have no power of
warmth.

Thuja’s warts are soft, pulpy and very sensitive; they burn,
itch and bleed easily when rubbed by clothing.

Dr. Clarke says of Thuja ‘People are all vaccinated and drink
tea and Thuja is the great antidote to tea and vaccination’.

Dr. Tyler says ‘And now a word of warning to homoeopaths
in regard to Thuja. it is not a safe drug in careless or ignorant
hands. The ‘Thuja-disease where the remedy is persisted in,
may also beccme chronic, according to Kent. We will quote. . .’
‘If you repeat again and again, you will have that which will
remain a life-time. . . Crude drugs do not impress the vital force
SO lastingly; but an individual who is thoroughly sensitive .
as sensitive as contagion, then if you undertake to prove Ga
potency) by giving it night and morning, you will rivet upon
hima lifelong miasm’.

Always the greater the power the greater its capabilities for
good and evil and the more the knowledge needed for its
employment. And | think we have proved that Thuja is, as
Hahnemann says ‘an uncommonly powerful medicinal sub-
stance .. . useful in some of the most serious diseases of man-
kind, for which hitherto there has beer no remedy.’

MERCURIUS

Characteristics:

Aching, especially in bones and where flesh is thin over the
bones. Swollen, flabby tongue taking imprint of teeth. Gums
swollen, spongy, bleeding. Breath very offensive. Sweats day
and night without relief in many ailments. Moist tongue
(saliva) with intense thirst. Creeping chilliness at beginning of
cold.


--- Page 72 ---
66
Mind:
Nose:

Mouth:

Throat:
Limbs:

Modalities:

THESYPHILITIC MIASMS Lesson 6

Restless 8 p.m. Time seems to pass slowly.
Discharge or catarrh thin and excoriating,
becoming thicker, greenish and more bland.
Coryza better on becoming heated.

Gums spongy, sometimes bleeding; tongue swol-
len, flabby and taking imprint of teeth. Whole
mouth moist with saliva, the odour very offen-
sive. Intense thirst.

Tonsils greatly swollen.

Sharp and lancinating pains in hip joints, thighs
and knees worse evening and night and during
movement and often with a sensation of coldness
in diseased parts.

Worse by heat and worse by cold. Worse at
night.

Patients needing this remedy are human barometers and
every change of temperature worsens their condition.

TEST PAPER No. 6

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

1. List six manifestations that would lead you to suspect that
the Syphilitic Miasm was present.

2. Give six indications that would point to Sycosis being

present.

3. With regard to tiie Sycotic Miasm, what else must be
taken into account, in addition to inherited gonorrhoeal
poison?

4. Thuja is a great antidote to:

wee eee metre tr emrecnee ec oueecetneenanscianssececcusecessssne


--- Page 73 ---
Lesson 7
COMBINED MIASMS

We stated earlier that rarely will one observe in any patient
the uncomplicated effect of one miasm. We are born with our
inheritance of Psora in greater or lesser degree on to which may
be grafted either or both of the other miasms. The truly chronic
case, therefore, presents a multiplicity ofsymptoms and it is our
task to recognise the underlying cause and to eliminate the
taints if possible by attacking them with the correctly indicated
remedy. c

We must, then, be able to recognise the traces of the under-
lying causes, however faint, before we can do good work. Let us
briefly sum up what we have learned from our study so far of the
miasms.

Psora: This is the oldest. Its main sphere of action is on the skin,
where, if undisturbed it forms a pruritis followed by a finer vesi-
cular eruption. Suppressive treatment changes its character
and drives it inward to the vital organs setting up functional
derangements, an alteration in metabolism, and hence defi-
ciency diseases and weakness from malnutrition.

Altered metabolism is evident in the psoric patient by his
constant desire to eat even after a meal, leading to over-strain of
the digestive organs and consequent troubles in the digestive

system. sta '
The weakness from malnutrition is further evidenced by the

constant desire to lie down and rest. -

The skin of the psoric patient is dirty and unhealthy and
there is often an intense skin irritation. He looks unclean in
himself and in his clothes, and his hair is always untidy and will
not stay in place. ae

Mentally he is timid and anxious. He is quick and active, but
easily prostrated with mental exhaustion. Any emotional
disturbance will upset him and make him ill.

67


--- Page 74 ---
68 COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 7

Sycosis: The miasm resulting from suppressed gonorrhoea. Its
action is to attack the blood producing an anaemia, involving
under-nourishment and deterioration of every cell in the body.
This anaemic condition can be observed in the pale, ashy grey
colour of the face. The nose is often red with prominent capil-
laries.

Sycosis infiltrates into the tissues causing catarrhs, fibroid
growths, tumours and warts. The discharges are characterised
by their offensive fish-brine odour. This miasm selects the
pelvic organs for many of its manifestations and ailments such
as menstrual disorders, growths in the uterus, leucorrnoea and
troubles of child-bearing evidence its presence in the organism.

Mentally the sycotic patient is irritable, jealous and suspi-
cious. All his troubles are worse in the cold, damp weather.

Syphilis: This manifests itself in ulceration and destruction of
tissue. Soft tissue such as is found in the mouth, nose and throat,
is especially susceptible to its action. The long bones and perio-
steum are also attacked. The teeth are deformed and the upper
and lower jaw are out of alignment. There are also bodily
deformities of all kinds. Mentally the patient with the syphilitic
background is sulky, morose, stubborn, depressed, stupid and
slow in comprehension. Worse at night and at the approach of
storms are two strong modalities.

Having the general action of the miasms firmly in mind we
can now proceed to consider their effects when combined ina
patient. We see that the combinations can be as follows:

1. Psora combined with syphilis.
2. Psora combined with sycusis.
3. Psora combined witn syphilis and sycosis.

Psora and Syphilis: This combination presents us with the picture
of the tubercular constitution and shows itself in various forms
such as lung phthisis, scrofula, etc., and also in acute forms such
as meningitis.

Brief notes on the tubercular constitution have been given in
Lesson 3 but in order to recognise this combination we give
below a more detailed description.

The Tubercular Constitution: Feebleness is the marked charac-
teristic. The person lacks vitality, is ‘run-down’, nervous and


--- Page 75 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 7 69

always tired. The face is pale and sunken, but sometimes there
is the tell-tale circumscribed red patch in each cheek. The neck
is long and thin. There is a history of poor circulation, the hands
and feet always being cold, yet occasionally one is told of hot
flushes to the head and chest.

The appetite is precocious and often breakfast cannot be
eaten. There may be a strong craving for salt.

Mentally the person is of a sullen and irritable disposition,
finding fault with everyone and everything around him. There
is a constant desire for change and he is always wanting to go
somewhere or do something different. Sometimes there is a
great depression followed by a complete reversal to hope.

In some cases the mental condition is so unstable that it
borders on insanity. Kent states that ‘Phthisis and insanity are
convertible conditions, the one falls into the other’.

Changes of weather aggravates the tubercular patient and he
is very sensitive to cold and damp. Yet he feels worse in a warm
room and can only breathe easily when out in the cold wind. He
feels better in a storm and one can often recognise this consti-
tution by remembering the phrase ‘Storms without and storms
within’.

There is usually an evening aggravation with a rise in
temperature and rapid pulse. Night sweats are common to the
constitution. Periodic headaches are another indication and
one should note a history of a headache each weekend. The
typical headache feels as ifan iron band were squeezing.

In women menstrual difficulties usually take the form of
being too early, too profuse and too long !asting. .

Where this constitution is suspected look for the delicate skin,
cold blue extremities, the long silken eyelashes, the thin neck
and elongated construction and the sunken chest bones.

Psora and Sycosis: This combination does not present the
destructive manifestation of the tubercular constitution. Owing
to the infiltrating properties of sycosis we expect to find diseases
of the nature of tumours and overgrowths. Pelvic and urinary
troubles are evidenced and gout; rheumatic heart troubles;
erysipelas and herpes zoster are skin manifestations. The great
majority of arthritic cases are due to these combined miasms
and great relief can be given to these cases with correct treat-
ment provided the degree of deformity is not too severe.


--- Page 76 ---
70 COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 7

Psora, Sycosis and Syphilis: This is, of course, the very worst
combination and by far the more difficult to cure. Among its
lesser results can be seen hay fever, psoriasis and lupus, but it
also leads to degenerative troubles of all sorts, particularly of
the vital organs such as heart, liver, kidneys and arteries.

Where this combination exists there is a strong tendency for
complaints to assume a malignant form. The great increase in
cancerous affections during recent years can be traced to the
spread of sycosis and syphilis on the psoric backgroud. The
Sycotic miasm added to the tubercular constitution at once
develops the malignant types of tubercular disease.

Cases exhibiting this combination of miasms present the
weakness of the psoric, the destruction of the syphilitic, and the
stubbornness of the sycotic and hence remedies must be
selected with the greatest care, the prescription being based
upon the true symptomatology of the active miasm at the time.
A remedy must be chosen capable of antidoting all three of the
miasms.

Read and study Chapter 3] of Roberts’ The Principles and Art
of Cure by Homoeopathy, and re-read Chapters 22—30.

USE OF THE NOSODES

There are a large number of medicines referred to in the
Materia Medica which are known as ‘Nosodes’. These reme-
dies are made from morbid or disease products, from human
beings and from animals. This may at first be a repellent
thought but if the student will think carefully over the lessons he
has learnt regarding the preparation of the Homocopathic
remedies, he will realise that by the process of potentisation or
dynamisation the disease product itself is destroyed and the
energy, or activity that brought it into manifestation is retained.
Hahnemann himself prepared the first Nosode from matter
contained in the scabies vesicle. This he called Psorinum. Since
that time many others have been prepared including
Syphilinum (Syphilis), | Medorrhinum = (Gonorrhoea),
Variolinum (Smallpox), Diphtherinum (Diphtheria),
Morbillium (Measles), Pertussin (\Whooping Cough), and
several forms of Tuberculinum. A number of others will be
found on reference to your Materia Medica.


--- Page 77 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 7 5 FI

Undoubtedly there is a close connection between diseases
and their micro-organisms and the allopathic profession has
pursued this discovery very fully, producing many vaccines and
serums which are injected directly into the blood stream of their
patients. The Homoeopath, on the other hand, uses the
products of disease strictly according to the Homoeopathic laws
in potency by way of mouth and as indicated by the symptoms
present in the patient.

The use of the Nosodes is one of the most difficult sections of
Homoeopathic medication, for the aggravation created by
them, even when correctly indicated can be very severe. There
are very few books written on this great subject. (Dr. Allen’s
MATERIA MEDICA OF THE NOSODES is probably one of
the best works but difficult to obtain.) We Suggest, therefore,
that students would be well advised to read widely and study
the Homoeopathic principles and laws before attempting any
use of the nosodes. The careless use of remedies or prescribing
with insufficient knowledge can only bring the whole art and
science of Homoeopathy into disrepute.

The main use of the Nosodes is when there is a personal or
family history of a particular disease, or certain symptoms
appear in the case-taking which suggest a history ofa particular

disease.

In almost every patient suffering from a chronic ailment
there is either a history of some actual disease which can be
antidoted by the appropriate nosode, or some latent disease.
Where latent disease is suspected, and study of the lessons on
the Chronic Miasms should have given us the indications, then
the correct nosode will often unlock the door to recovery and
cure. 3
Let us give an example of the use ofa nosode from the work of
Dr. H.C. Allen, a famous pioneer Homoeopath. He quotes the
case of a man of 60 who suffered obstinate acute articular rheu-
matism. ‘He suffered excruciating agony from neuralgia. After
a desperate battle for life in the first week of September he was
relieved, and rose from ‘is bed a wreck. It was expected that
time and out-door life and the best hygienic measures would
help him. But weeks and months passed without a change; he
walked the streets leaning on a cane, bent over, muffled in
wraps to his ears and looking like an old man about to fall into
the grave. Three months after my attendance I saw him pass


--- Page 78 ---
72 COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 7

my office and considering his previous good health and robust
frame the question arose ‘Why does he remain in this condi-
tion?’ Is there any uncured miasm, hereditary or acquired? For
reasons unnecessary to mention | could not ask him.

“Dr. Swan’s suggestion now occurred to me; an obstinate case
of rheumatism might be due to latent gonorrhoea and Medorr-
hinum high will cure it; in many cases where improvement
reaches a certain stage and then stops, Medorrhinum has
removed the obstruction and the case progressed to a cure; and
this too in cases where gonorrhoea appeared to bea most unlikely
cause teaching us, if anything, the universality of latent gonorr-
hoea and the curative power of dynamic virus.

‘His wife consulted me on other matters and said that her
husband was as well as could be expected considering his age;
she believed he would not do anything more, as he regarded his
feeble state clue to his age. However, he came next day and |
gave him three doses of Medorrhinum to be taken every
morning. Within ten days he returned feeling well and looking
well. I then gave him one dose to be taken after some time; this
was the last prescription he has required. Within a month after
the Medorrhinum he dropped his cane and muffler, walked the
street with a firm step, a perfectly well man having increased in
weight from 140 to 212 pounds.’

An important modern field of the use of nosodes is in prophy-
laxis against epidemic and other acute infectious diseases.
Experiments have shown that the nosode of the disease,
‘when administered to healthy persons in small infrequent
‘doses, will increase their resistance to that disease. For

example, Morbillinum will protect against measles, Diphtheri-
num will protect against‘diphtheria and so on. When admini-
stering the nosodes in this way it is usual to give one dose of the
30th potency each week for four weeks.

TEMPERATURE

The normal temperature in man is 98.4°, this temperature
remaining almost constant in health.

In disease the normal temperature may rise as high as | 10°F.
or sink to 90° for a time; but the risk to life is great when it passes
above 106° or below 95°


--- Page 79 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 7 73

Fall of temperature may be due to many causes. It generally
acompanies great loss of blood, starvation, and the collapsed
condition which sometimes results from severe attacks of fever,
peritonitis, and other devitalizing acute diseases. Certain
chronic diseases are generally accompanied by a subnormal
temperature, diabetes, Bright’s disease, and myxoedema, being
the most outstanding, but these diseases are for qualified medi-
cal treatment only.

Rise in temperature is a characteristic for acute diseases.
Injuries to the nervous system, even unpleasant sensations in
children and nervous people, may have a similar effect. A rapid
rise in temperature in a person gravely ill is to be considered a
most ominous sign. A high temperature in some acute diseases
is, however, a much less serious feature than in others. For
example, in pneumonia, a temperature of 105° is not infre-
quent, whilst in rheumatic fever and diphtheria the temper-
ature generally ranges between 101° and 103°. But should the
temperature go higher than the expected maximum in these
cases, It is to be regarded as a very grave sign.

In most diseases the temperature gradually abates as the
patient recovers, but in others the temperature drops rapidly
following a ‘crisis’. For example, in pneumonia the temperature
suddenly falls, perspiration breaks out, the pulse becomes
slower, and the breathing quieter. Often this ‘crisis’ is preceded
by an aggravation ofall the symptoms, including a sharp rise in
temperature.

The temperature is measured by a clinical thermometer
which registers from 95° to 110°. Care should be taken that —
thermometers are sterilised after use with each patient, the
mercury being well shaken down to betow 96°.

If for any reason it is not possible to take the temperature in
the mouth, an alternative method is to place the thermometer
as high as possible in the armpit, the arm being tightly folded
across the chest. In this position the thermometer should be left
for at least 5 minutes in order to obtain an accurate reading.

In the case of very young children, or extremely restless
patients where it is advisable and even necessary to take the
temperature, the thermometer may be inserted in the rectum
for five or six minutes when an accurate reading should be
obtained.


--- Page 80 ---
14 COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 7

RESPIRATION

The breathing ofa healthy person is the normal inhaling and
exhaling of air, both being equal and full. The frequency varies
in individuals, but usually approximates 14—18 inspirations
and !4—18 expirations a minute.

In disease conditions, especially those affecting the respira-
tory apparatus, we should note the degree of change from
normal; whether pain is present, its position, and any sounds
made by the inward or outward passage of air.

Breathlessness may be due to any condition which renders
the blood impure or deficient in oxygen, and which therefore
produces excessive involuntary efforts to gain more air. It is
often the sign of fever or inflammatory conditions, and ifassoci-
ated with smallness or shortness of breath, i.e. an inadequate
expansion of the lungs, it indicates a degree of obstruction. This
may be due to congestion (bronchitis or inflammation of the
lungs) and ina later state, to fluid in the chest cavity (pleurisy or
pneumonia), or to emphysema or pressure by a tumour.

Difficult breathing is often caused by a narrowing of the air
passages. This is seen especially in children in such diseases as
croup, asthma, and diphtheria, when the effect is possibly very
sudden and alarming.

Coughs point to various derangements according to the
conditions which precede, accompany or follow them. They
may be associated with direct or local inflammation of the res-

piratory apparatus, or with sympathetic affections of these
organs, originating in other organic causes of irritation, possibly
in the stomach or digestive processes generally. Coughs should
then be considered with*all other symptoms present in order to
appreciate their significance. Any cough which tends to become
chronic should lead one to a very full investigation of the case.

Pain is a very important symptom and the nature of it,
(stabbing, cramping) should be noted.

In all chest conditions, rest is a most important factor. When
the body is quiet, the circulation becomes slower, the pulse and

Tespiration rates slacken, and the heart and lungs are assisted in
their function.

. . . ®
Auscultation: This is the term applied to the method of deter-
mining the condition of certain internal organs, by the sense of


--- Page 81 ---
COMBINED MEASMS Lesson 7 he)

hearing. Breathing sounds can be heard by placing one’s ear
direct on the pauient’s chest (direct) or by the use of a stetho-
scope (ndircet). With clrect auscultation oe is enabled to
judge only the condition of a relatively large area, while the
stethoscope brings out greater detail at localised points.

Successtul use of a stethuscope. however, calls for practical
training and it is not our intenuon to go into the art of auscul-
tation here. We would. however, mention briefly two common
terms used to describe certain sounds when studying the res-
piratory function.

Rates: Sounds produced by passage of air through the bronchi
which contain a secreuon or are narrowed by swelling of their
walls or by spasms. Fither “moist or ‘dry’. Moist rales occur in
conditions such as bronchitis. pneumonia, tuberculosis, pul-
monary congestion etc. They can be distinguished as a bub-
bling or crackling sound usually appearing at the end of the
inspiration. Dry rales are heard where the bronchial tubes have
been narrowed as a result of inflammation of spasm (asthma).
and contain a thin tenacious secreuon. The act of breathing
produces squeaking or groaning sounds. Sounds produced in
the larger bronchial tubes are deep-toned, those in the finer
tubes. piping and squeaking and whistling. These rales are
often termed “musical” on account of the diflerent tones, pro-
duced, and are usually loudest at the end of the expiration.

Fretion Frenitus: grating feeling communicated to the hand
by the movements of lungs when the membrane covering them
is roughened, as in pleurisy. This sound can also be heard as a
superficial rough rubbing which occurs only with respiration
and ceasing when the breath is held. The quality of the sounds
vary greatly: they may be grating, rubbing, r: sping, and creak-
Ing.

BAPTISIA

Characteristres

Face dark red, purple; the darker red the more Baptisia.
Expression besotted. Mind is contused and therefore it feels as it
body is scattered about bed and he cannot collect the pieces. .\I!
discharges very offensive. Great prastrauon with aching and


--- Page 82 ---
76 Lesson 7 COMBINED MIASMS

soreness all over; in whatever position the patient lies the parts
rested upon feel sore and bruised. (Compare this remedy with

Arnica.)

Mind: Stupor, falls asleep whilst being spoken to.
Mentally restless but cannot move.

Head: Dull, heavy, pressive. Frontal headache with
pressure at root of nose. Soreness worse stooping.

Face: Flushed, dusky, besotted.

Mouth: Filthy taste. Putrid, offensive breath.

Throat: Pain and soreness of fauces. Can only swallow

water. Dark putrid ulcers. Dysphagia worse
swallowing liquids.

Respiratory: Difficult breathing worse 6 p.m. Craves fresh air.
Cough worse 6 p.m.

Neck and Stiffmess and tenderness in neck muscles worse

Back: moving head. Aching of parts lain on worse night
from 2 a.m.

Modalities: Worse on waking; worse walking; worse open air;

worse cold wind; worse Autumn or hot weather.

This remedy is almost a specific in gastric flue and epidemic
influenza.

EUPERTORIUM PERF.

Characteristics

Intense aching all over the body deep in the bones, before a
chill. Chill 7—9 a.m. Vomiting of bile between chill and heat.

This is another remedy which does excellent work in influ-
enza providing the symptoms agree.

Dr. Hale describes the typical fever thus:

“The chill is nearly always in the morning and is preceded for
several hours by thirst, soreness and aching of the bones. The
thirst continues during the chill and heat. The chill is attended
by nausea, vomiting of bile, intense aching and soreness in the
flesh of the extremities and often all over the body. These
symptoms continue during the heat, especially vomiting which
is often painful and incessant. The heat is apt to be prolonged

until evening or into the night and may be followed or not by
sweat (with chilliness).


--- Page 83 ---
Lesson? COMBINED MIASMS 77

Mind: Despondency; very restless.

Nose: Coryza with sneezing; aching in every bone.
Stomach: Vomiting of bile with trembling and great
nausea causing great prostration.

Respiratory: | Hoarseness worse morning. Soreness of chest.
Back: Aching pains as from bruise.
Limbs: Aching deep in bones with soreness of flesh.

Intense soreness and aching of limbs as if bruised
or beaten. Compare this with Arnica.

Modalities: Motion aggravated; changing position even
slightly brings chilliness down back.

HEPAR SULPHURIS

Characteristics
Extremely sensitive mentally and especially physically to a
draught of air — to least touch — and to pain which becomes so
intolerable at times as to cause fainting.
Great tendency to suppurations — even slight injuries or
scratches suppurate.
Mind: Irritable and diflicult to get along with. Slighrest
cause irritates with hasty speech and anger.
Child outrageously cross.

Throat: Choking worse cold air. Sensation of splinter or
fishbone in throat.

Stomach: Longing for acid foods.

Respiratory: \Whistling breathing worse least cold air. Cough

worse least cold air. Ke :roup — this remedy is very
often needed after Aconite but only if the child is
sweaty and weak and worse least cold air. Croup
with rather loose cough with wheezing and rat-
tling. As if mucus would come up but it docs not
—— worse early morning.

Modalities: | \Norse 6@—7 p.m. Sudden weakness daily. Worse
cold air.

This patient often wears an overcoat in hot weather. Pains
are throbbing and stabbing. Discharge trum all parts of body
smell like old cheese or sour.

Note that the nose is stopped up every ume the patient goes


--- Page 84 ---
78 Lesson 7 COMBINED MIASMS

to the cold air.
in 2 ae Sulph. stands mid-way between Calc. Carb and

Sulphur and the strongest characteristic is its hypersensitive-
ness to touch, pain and cold air. The pauent can faint from pain
even though itis slight. If there are inflammations, swellings or
even skin eruptions the patient cannot bear to have them
touched or even have cold air blow on them.

When pus is about to form, or has already formed, Hepar will
hasten the discharge and help the healing.

Hepar Sulph. helps in respiratory conditions where there is
chronic catarrh and the nose gets stopped up each time the
patient goes out into the cold air, and is better in warm room.

It is excellent for croup when symptoms are worse by least
cold air. In chronic asthma Hepar is the remedy when worse
dry cold air and better damp air. Nash says he knows of no other
remedy that has amelioration so strongly in damp weather as
Hepar.

Hepar helps chronic dyspepsia when there is a craving for
acid things — this is often accompanied by diarrhoea which is
sour. The stool too is sour.

Compare Hepar with Silica as they have many symptoms in
common. Dr. Farrington »vs: ‘Hepar promotes and regulates
suppuration in a remarkable manner (second only to Silica) but
is generally required at an earlier stage than Silica’. Their
mentalities, however, are as wide apart as poles. Dr. Tyler says:
‘Silica, with its want of self confidence, its lack of ‘grit’; its
timidity; its suffering from anticipation — as when having to
appear in public — Hepar — sensitive beyond all bounds of
reason; irritable, impetuous. Sensitive to draughts, to air, ulcers
so sensitive that they cannot bear the slighest touch — sensitive
mentally, even to sudden murderous impulses.’

Allen says: “The skin eruptions of Sulphur are dry. itching
and not sensitive to touch; while in Hepar the skin is unhealthy.
suppurating moist and intensely sensitive to touch.

Hepar is a great remedy for ears and threatening mastoid.

Kent says: ‘Sweating all night without relief belongs to a
great many vumplaints of Hepar. Inspiring cold air will in-
crease the cough and putting the hand out of bed will increase
the pain in the larynx or cough. Putting the hand or foot out of
bed is a general aggravation ofall the complaints of Hepar.

“Che mind wkes part in this oversensitiveness, and manifests


--- Page 85 ---
Lesson? COMBINED MIASMS 79

iself by a state of extreme irritability. Every little thing that
disturbs the patient makes him intensely angry and abusive and
impulsive. The impulses will overwhelm him and make him
wish to kill his best friend in an instant. [mpulses also that are
without cause sometimes crop out of Hepar. {mpulses to do
violence...toburn... to destrov.

There may be dreams of fire and the pains are worse at night.

There are often habitual bronchial catarrhs with loud
rattling mucus.

There is sometimes hastv speech and hasty drinking.

The sweat is often cold. clammy and offensive.

TEST PAPER No. 7

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. Phere should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

1. What miasms make up the Tubercular constitution?

2. How would you proceed to treat a patient suffering from
all three miasms?

. What is a Nosode, and when should it be used?

4. What are the chief characteristics of Hepar Sulph?

[Se]


--- Page 86 ---
Lesson 8
THE PHYSICIAN'S PURPOSE

‘The physician has no higher aim than to make sick folk well,
to pursue what is called the Art of Healing.

‘The physician’s first duty is to enquire into the whole condi-
tion of the patient: the cause of the disease, his mode of life, the
nature of his mind, the tone and character of his sentiments, his
physical constitution, and especially the symptoms of his
disease . . . according to the rules in the Organon.’

Thus Hahnemann summed up the essentials necessary
before the Homoeopathic method of prescribing could be
applied successfully, for the treatment of disease.

Let us endeavour to follow Hahnemann’s instructions by
studying the patient — the sick person. Here we will concern
ourselves mainly with his condition — the cause of the disease,
his mode of life and habits.

The condition of the Patient:

Hahnemann uses this phrase in a comprehensive manner to
include all agents which may have influenced the patient’s life
and led to his present state. Apart from the particular
symptoms of which the patient now complains we must know
something of his:

1 Past History: Details of his past life; any serious illness,
injury, Operation, or experience which may have a bearing
on the present condition.

2. Family History: Details of the health of other members of
his family, and what diseases (if any) appear to recur in
the family.

3. Occupational History: Type of occupation and what

special stresses are placed on the patient by his cmploy-
ment.

4. Habits: What is his daily routine.
ae 0


--- Page 87 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 8 8]

5. Social History: Details of personal life and the emotional
factors which influence it.

Past History:

The recording of the past history falls into three main groups:
1. Places of residence
2. Illness suffered, and

3. Unpleasant experiences.

1. The place of birth should be noted and where the patient
has since lived. If he has at any time been in tropical countries
special enquiry should be made relative to any tropica! diseases
from which he may have suffered.

2. <A record of previous illnesses, operations and injuries, is
next considered. What was the recovery from these? When
noted in chronological! order, the practitioner can visualise the
progress of a disease, or tendency to a certain disease. The
number of vaccinations and inoculations should also be
recorded as these may well have had a profound effect upon the
constitution. Where any doubt arises as to the name of a
previous illness the symptoms experienced should be noted.
Under this heading, it will be noted whether the patient has led
an active, robust life, or whether he has been of a weakly
constitution and therefore spent much of his time in sedentary
occupation and hobbies.

3. ‘Unpleasant experiences’ covers many possibilities. Severe
shocks, disappointments, griefs, war-time services are but a few
of the experiences from which a person may have suffered.
Special note of any circumstance, should be made when the
patient states ‘I have never been well since. . .. Such a remark is
often made concerning the recovery from a severe illness, or
when the person has suffered acutely from the loss ofa loved one
and so on. Similarly, consider the many forms of neuroses
following war-time bombing or shell-shock. Disease has a
beginning and only by diligent enquiry can we ascertain the
true cause.

Family History: ,
The family history is of great importance to the homoeo-
pathic prescriber as it shows the inherited constitution of the


--- Page 88 ---
82 COMBINED MIASMS | Lesson 8

patient and gives a gencral impression of the health of the
patient's forebears. Some families show a definite tendency
toward emotional instability; others are characteristically
placid or stolid. Heart, kidney, nervous or mental diseases show
a tendency to appear in members of the same [amily and
furthermore, syphilis or tuberculosis in a family offers the
hazard of contact-infection.

Special attention should be paid to the general health, habits,
or particular diseases of the parents, brothers, sisters, grand-
parents, uncles and aunts, and even cousins if considered neces-
sary.

Occupational History:

This should establish the exact nature of the patient’s work—
what he does, and how he does it. One should have in mind the
possibility of an occupational disease, some common hazards
being among the following:

|. Exposure to dust or filings: Miners, metal and stone-
workers, millers, seedsmen.

2. Toxic chemicals: Plumbets, house-painters, printers and
workers in china and earthenware are especially exposed
to lead poisoning. Similarly garage-mechanics are con-
stantly in the fumes of carbon-monoxide, rubber workers
with benzul and so on.

3. Abnormal temperature: Furnacemen, workers in cold
storage plants etc.

4. Noise: Nervous affections (neuroses) are produced as a
result of constant nqise. Those exposed especially to this
irritant are engineers, riveters and boilermakers.

One can assess from the patient’s occupation whether it is
sedentary or active, and whether it is dependent on mental or
physicai activity. Persons employed in sedentary occupations
tend to suffer from digestive complaints, stomach and liver
affections. Associated with mental activity is a tendency to
nervous complaints.

Habits: "
Mental and physical fatigue. unwise food and eating habits
and the immoderate use of tea, coffee, alcohol, or the taking of


--- Page 89 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 8 83

drugs are often the basis of sickness in these modern times. It is
therefore. necessary to obtain a detailed picture of the patient’s
daily routine as it is unlikely that he will admit that he is over-
worked or indulges to excess in any one thing.

The prescriber must form his own opinion on the basis of the
actual facts and not on the patient’s interpretation of them.
Close questioning should be made as to the time of rising; how
much time is allowed for eating breakfast; whether a natural
urge to evacuate the bowel is suppressed until a more conveni-
ent time; what is the routine at the place of employment; what
kind of lunch does he have; does he keep late hours; how he
sleeps, whether he has to rely on sleeping pills.

We must also enquire as to food and drink. What constitutes
for him a typical breakfast, lunch and dinner; does he eat or
drink between meals: how many cigarettes are smoked each
day; what drugs are taken and why; how much alcohol is taken;
(here it may be necessary to refer to a member of the family or
close friend if it is suspected that the patient is addicted to
drinking).

Lastly, the patient’s hobbies. Does he play any strenuous
games; what form does his rclaxation take?

Social History:

The evaluation of mental symptoms have always played a big
part in homoeopathic practice and it has been proved that e1i0-
tional disturbances often produce symptoins suggestive of
serious organic disease. The mental state influences liealth by
affecting the course of organic disease. For vxample. worn is
often the predisposing cause of chronic indigestion and gasiric
ulcers.

In order to obtain a clear picture of the patient's emotional
Status it is necessary to know something of b’s character and his
adjustment to life. One should know of his family. business,
financial and sex problems. To obtain such knowledge requires
great skill on the part of the prescriber and will prove extremely
difficult unless the patient has absoluir confidence in him and
looks upon him as a friend who can be trusted.

The prescriber must. therefore, be without prejudice and
view everything mentioned {rom the patient's standpoint. He
must never express surprise or disapproval as that wor? veate
a barrier immediately. His questions must be fran’


--- Page 90 ---
84 COMBINED MIASMS | Lesson 8

way that the patient does not feel the practitioner is merely
inquisitive.

Questions similar to the following give us the social back-
ground to the case. Is he happy or depressed; is he satisfied with
his lot in life; does he lack friends; has he any fears; does he like
his work; what financial worries has he; is his salary sufficient to
support him and his family; is his married life happy and
normal.

Sex problems are the most difficult of all. An unhappy
married life, or intense bitterness in the unmarried, can be the
source of untold misery and consequent illness. A sympathetic
aproach to this delicate subject will create a response, if not at
the first interview, at some later date.

On the ability to understand the patient rests the ability to
treat the case.

TAKING THE CASE

This is undoubtedly one of the most difficult parts of
Homoeopathic treatment but it is essential that the art of case-
taking be understood. Unless the case is taken properly it is
impossible to find the remedy and help the patient.

REMEMBER THE PRACTITIONER NEEDS TO GET A
PICTURE OF THE PATIENT THAT IS DIFFERENT
FROM HIS NORM, CAUSED BY HIS SICKNESS.

The Written Record:

It is absolutely essential to have a written record of every case
for symptom analysis angi reference later, in order to judge
whether improvement is taking place.

To be sure that no details are missed it is helpful to use a
case-sheet upon which various headings have been written.
When the patient has told all he can of his illness it is then up to
the practitioner to fill out the picture by following up the
patient’s statements, making sure that no important matter has
been overlooked.

Meeting the Patient: 4
At the initial interview we must gain the patient’s confidence.
If the interview is taking place in your own home it is assumed


--- Page 91 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 8 85

that you will show him into a quiet room where you will not be
disturbed. You will, of course, see that he is comfortably seated.
He should face the light in order that he may be closely
observed. Remember some people will be extremely sensitive
about relating intimate details of themselves and it is impor-
tant to know whether they are being evasive or truthful. But be
careful to distinguish the difference between embarrassment
and deliberate evasion.

The attitude of the practitioner should be one of close atten-
tion. He should observe how the patient sits — whether he is
restless, despondent; the colour of his eyes, hair and face. A
general impression of his constitution and temperament may be
formed. When he shook hands, was his hand dry or moist, hot or
cold?

The Patient Talks:

Let the patient relate zn his own words the details of his
sickness. He should not be interrupted unless there is some
point which is not clear. This procedure should be continued
until it is quite apparent that no more can be gained without
closer questioning.

The practitioner must go through the whole written record
and if points are not clear encourage the patient to qualify his
statements. For example, he complains of a cough; he must be
asked how long he has had it, when it is worse, when better, if
there is any pain, where does he feel the pain, what is the
character of the pain, and in this way the symptom picture is

built up.

The following will further illustrate this point:
Time: At what time of the day ornight is the patient worse.
Place: What is the exact position of any pain or discomfort.

Pain or Discomfort: (these questions should be repeated respect-
ing every pain or discomfort mentioned).

1. You refer to a pain in your. .. At what time of the day or
night would you say this pain is worse.

2. When do you get relief from the pain.

3. In what sort of weather is the pain worse (cold, hot, dry,
wet).


--- Page 92 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 8

4. What do you notice about the pain when the weather
changes from, say, dry to wet — or vice versa.

5. How does warmth affect the pain (bed, fire, room etc.).

6. How does movement (of the arm, leg etc.) affect the pain.

7. What effect does rubbing of the part have on the pain.

8. How does pressure affect the pain. (Pressure of a hat, or
clothes generally. Better loosening clothing).

9. Does the pain ever move to another part of your body? Ifso
explain what happens.

General

10. How do you feel before. during and after meals.

1]. Have you a good appetite, how do you feel if vou go
without a meal.

12. Are you a thirsty person — do you preter hot or cold
drinks.

13. At what me ol the day or night do you feel worse.

I4. What sort of weather do you dislike most — (cold, hot.
dry, wet).

15. How do you fecl when the weather changes. (Gold to hot
etc.)

16. How do vou feel before, during and after a storm.

17. Do vou like warmth in getleral, warmth of the bed, of the
room. of the fire.

18. Are you affected by draughts of air and changes in tem-
perature.

19. In what position do you get most relief — sitting. stand-
ing, lying.

4U. What vaccinations have you had; were there anv notice-
able reactions from them.

21. How do you feel at the seaside.

22. Do you take colds in winter or in other seasons.

23, How do collars. belts and tight clothing affect you.

24. What retief do you get by moving about, by walking.


--- Page 93 ---
COMBINED MIASMS Lessang 87

25. How do you feel when Tiding in a vehicle.

26. Some people perspire a great deal. Would you say that you
perspire morc than a normal amount. Where particularly.
Anv odour.

‘

Food Cravings and Aversions: (See under: Stomach — Appetite
perverted etc.)

27. What is the kind of food for which you have a marked
craving or aversion, or what are those that make you sick
or you cannot eat. (Sweets, pastry, rich food etc.)

28. How much salt do you need for your taste. Pepper,
mustard, pickles, sauces etc.

29. How much sugar do you like in your tea, puddings, etc.

30. How many sweets do you eat ina day.

Sleep: (See under Nervous System, Insomnia, Position
Restlessness, Dreams etc.)
31. In which position do you sleep.
32. How many pillows do you have.
33. Have you ever been told that you talk, laugh, shriek etc., in
your sleep.
34. At what time do vou wake up. What disturbs your sleep.

35. Do you dream; do you have recurring dreams.

Mental: (See: Emotions, Fears ete.)

36. Have you at any time in your life experienced any mental
shocks, bad news, good news, disappointments.

37. Do you like sympathy.

38. Do you like entertaining friends, or being entertained, or
do you prefer to be alone.

39. Do you weep easily and, if so,

40. At what time in the 24 hour’ do you feel depressed, sad, or
pessimistic.

41. In what circumstances do you feel jealous.

on what occasions?


--- Page 94 ---
88 COMBINED MIASMS Lesson 8

49. When and on what occasins do you you feel frightened or
anxious (Darkness, being alone, death etc.)

43. Some people are very tidy, others not so tidy. Would you
Say you were a very tidy person or otherwise.

Menses: (See under Female Sexual System — Menstruation
etc.)

44. At what age did menstruation begin.

45. How frequent are the menstrual periods.

46. Do you have pain with the periods. Ifso describe the pain
and what relieves it.

47. Whatis the duration, abundance, colour, odour. Arc there
any clots.

48. At what hour in the 24 hours is the flow greatest. Daytime
or at night when resting.

49. Do you have any discharge at any other time. Describe its
character (colour, consistency, odour etc.)

The following questions may also be helpful but each case
must be dealt with individually:

Type of pain: Whether it is a dull ache, stinging, burning, stab-
bing, shooting.

Weather: In what sort of weather is he better or worse. Do
changes in the weather affect him.

Thermic Reaction: How does he react to heat and cold. Simi-
larly are his pains better jn heat or cold. Reaction to the heat
of the fire, draughts ofair, etc., also come under this heading.

Possible Causation: What does the patient think caused his
present indisposition.

Modalities: Conditions in general which aggravate or amclio-
rate his condition, such as movement, rest, etc.

Sensations: Whether the patient has any unusual sensations,
such as a feeling of wearing damp stockings, or that he must
walk carefully as his legs feel brittle and may break.

Sleep and Dreams: The kind of sleep. The time of waking. Does
he have recurrent dreams ofa special nature.

Emotional Reaction: How does he react to sympathy, waiting,
disappointments. etc. :


--- Page 95 ---
Lesson’ THE PHYSICIAN’S PURPOSE 89

Temperament: This is closely linked with the emotional
reaction. This part should always be left until last when the
complete confidence of the patient has been gained. The
questioning must be made very tactfully. One must judge
whether the patient is likely to be of a placid or irritable
disposition, full of life or morose, jealous in nature, sensitive
etc.

Some Mistakes:
When questioning the patient it is essential not to ask:

]. Leading questions which suggest answers, such as ‘Does a
cold bandage improve your headache’. This would be
better — ‘In what circumstances do you get relief from
your headache?’

2. Direct questions. These will nearly always be answered by
‘yes’ or ‘no’ and such an answer is quite valueless and
should not be included in the record.

3. When a patient tells a few of his symptoms, a remedy
sometimes comes to mind and it is very difficult not to ask
questions which will lead the patient to give symptoms
that may agree with the remedy already thought of. This
type of question must be avoided.

4. Alternating questions, or skipping from symptom to
symptom. When a patient is telling you of the pains, in
say, his arms, keep to that subject and thoroughly exhaust
every modality and detail possible before passing on to
something else. Skipping from symptom to symptom con-
fuses the patient and important ‘questions may be for-
gotten.

DO NOT be biased when taking the case. For instance. ifthe
case is similar to a previous one, it will be a temptation to
consider the same remedy. This will lead to fitting the case to
the remedy which may not be correct. Have no remedy in mind
until the details have been ascertained.

Hahnemann suggested the following method should be
adopted: »

‘The patient details his sufferings. The persons who are
about him relate what he has complained of. how he has be-
haved himself, and all that they have remarked in him.


--- Page 96 ---
90 Lesson8 THE PHYSICIAN'S PURPOSE

The Physician sees, hears and observes with his other senses
whatever there is changed and extraordinary in the patient. He
writes all this down in the very words which the latter and the
persons around him make use of. .

‘He permits them to continue speaking to the end without
interruption, except where they wander into useless digres-
sions, taking care to exhort them at the commencement to speak
slowly that he may be enabled to follow them in taking down
whatever he deems necessary.’

Hahnemann then suggests three approaches:

1. Listening to the patient.
2. Listening to those around the patient and
3. Observation.

We have dealt in some detail with the first instruction, and
reference has been made to the patient’s appearance. Let us
consider this last instruction a little further. The patient is a
middle-aged lady. She comes slowly into the room and
although it is a warm day, she is wearing a coat. She sinks into
th chair and lines of anxiety are apparent across her forehead. A
small piece of cotton has settled on her coat; very carefully she
picks it off and looks round for a receptacle in which to place it.
All this may seem commonplace, but nevertheless it is possible
that these observations will suggest Arsenicum. This may be
noted on the record sheet for reference later — but the observa-
tion must not bias the practitioner towards that remedy.

Hahnemann’s other instruction was to question those about
the patient. If after much questioning the necessary facts are
still not obtained, then, if possible, it is often useful to question
the wife, or husband,’or anyone who can give a betier insight
into the patient's condition. Temper their comments with
commonsense however, as an anxious wife, for example, may
exaggerate certain symptoms in her desire to be helpful.

Read and Study Chapter 8 of Roberts’ The Principles and Art of
Cure by Homoeopathy

BRYONIA

Characteristics:
Worse by all movements. Better pressure (or better by lying


--- Page 97 ---
Lesson® THE PHYSICIAN'S PURPOSE aI

on painful side.) Dryness of mucous membranes.

Mind:

Head:

Mouth:
Throat:

Stomach:

Stools:

Chest:

Limbs:

Fever:

Modalities:

Great irritability with bouts of bad temper.
Anxiety better in open air.

Vertigo, faintness and nausea from raising head
from pillow. Pains full, frontal, splitting or burst-
ing, worse movement, stooping, coughing, open-
ing or moving the eyes, in hot weather; better
hard pressure.

Dry with great thirst. for large quantities. Sour or
bitter taste better after eating. Lips dry, parched,
cracked.

Dry.

Sour. Food lies in epigastrium like a stone, better
bringing up wind; better eructations of tasteless
gas. Pain worse breathing deeply, worse.
coughing. Pains beiter passing flatus. Colic
better walking. Nausea worse rising up from bed.
Hard and dry. Patient is often constipated.
Stools large as if burnt: crumbling.

Stitching pain cu coughing: patient wants to
hold his chest as pressure gives relief. Breathing
deeply aggravates Cough hard, dry, racking.
worse coming from open air into a warm room.
Sutching and tearing pains often in joint, better
pressure or lying on painful side. Pale swellings.
worse slight touch or least motion.

Chilliness worse warm room; better open air;
better warm drinks; worse 9 p.m.

Worse all movement; warmth and warm rooms;
evening 9 p.m. Better rést; hard pressure; drink-
ing large quantities.

Complaints from taking cold or getting hot in summer; from
cold drinks in hot weather. Complaints when warm weather
sets in after cold days. Complaints from cald winds.

One of the chief characterisucs of this remedy is Aggrazation
from any motion and a corresponding rclicf from absolute rest.
cither ments! or physical. Other modalities are: Worse in warm

weather after

oid: and better from qriet and Iving o: paintul

de Gn ather weeds — Better for fereooice


--- Page 98 ---
2 =>

.
ge’

ey i ~
5 TSS Lesson8 THE PHYSICIAN'S PURPOSE
Jj

Dryness runs all through the remedy; dry lips, a dry mouth;
the patient will want drinks in large quantities, at long inter-
vals. He will probably be constipated, with hard dry stools (as if
burnt). His cough will be dry, hard, racking, with scanty
expectoration.

Nash stated Bryonia to be ‘Suitable to dry nervous slender
persons of irritable disposition and rheumatic tendency’.

He also said ‘It makes no difference what the name of the
disease, if the patient feels greatly improved by lying still, and
suflers greatly on slightest motion; and the more and longer he
moves the more he suffers, Bryonia is the first remedy to be
thought of, and there must be very strong contra-indications
along other lines that will rule it out. Nor does it make any
difference what organ or tissue is the seat of the disease,
mucous, serous or muscular, the same rule applies.’

For all gastric conditions study Bryonia, Nux Vomica and
Pulsatilla together and if Bryonia is the remedy there will be
some of the outstanding symptoms mentioned above.

With constipation, there is no desire to go to stool; or there
may be diarrhoea worse in the mornings on beginning to move.
Urine is dark and scanty.

The pains of Bryonia are stitching and sticking, worse by
movement and at night. The pains can be decp in the brain, in
head, eyes, ears — in fact all pains of the Bryonia patient have
this stitching and sticking characteristic, and they arc all worse
on motion and better for pressure.

Bryonia is a great East wind remedy. Patients needing this
remedy have acute sufferings after exposure to cold, dry, East
winds.

Mentally,-Bryonia has great anxiety — anxiety about the
future — and about the everyday concerns of life. Very ill-
humoured, morose, everything puts him out of humour.

Dr. Tyler says ‘And now, to sum up — If you get a patient
with severe stitching pains, worse for the slightest movement;
worse for sitting up; better for pressure; very thirsty for long
drinks of cold water; very irritable; angry and not only angry
but with sufferings increased by being disturbed mentally or
physically; white tongue, in delirium ‘wants to go home’ (even if
they are at home); busy in his dreams and in delirium with his

everyday business, you can administer Bryonia and — bet on
the result!”

92


--- Page 99 ---
‘
%
‘
‘
’
Gi
=
=

Lesson8 “THI PHYSICIAN'S PURPOSE VA 93 Avy
RHUS TOXICODENDRON SS

Characteristics
Great restlessness — changes position often and this gives

temporary relief. Lameness and stiffness on beginning to move

after rest; on getting up in the morning; better cont‘ aed

motion. Triangular red tip of tongue.

Mind: Extreme restlessness, with continued change of
position. Great apprehension at night, cannot
remain in bed.

Face: Jaws crack when chewing. Tongue coated,
except red triangular space at tip.
Back: Pain and stiffness in small of back, better motion,

or lying on something hard.

Extremities: | This remedy acts on fibrous tissue. Swelling and
stiffness of joints from sprains, overlifting or over
stretching. This may also involve ligaments,
tendons and membranes of joints. Rheumatic
pains in limbs, also with numbness and tingling,
joints weak or stiff, worse on beginning to move
and in damp weather, better from continued
motion.

Skin: Itching intense. Urticaria. Burning eczematous
eruptions with tendency to scale formation. Care
should be used when prescribing Rhus Tox for
any skin eruption as it can cause an aggravation.

Modalities: | Worse (lameness, stiffness and pain) on first
moving or after rest, on rising from bed in the
morning. Better continued motion. The con-
dition needing this remedy may be caused by
strains, over lifting, severe muscular exercise,
exposure to cold, especially wet cold.

URTICA URENS

This remedy is included for the treatment of burns and
scalds, and it should be in every kitcher.

For slight burns, such as when a housewife catches her arm or
hand on the hot stove, apply Urtica Urens mether tincture once
or twice and the burning and stinging will go in a very short

es]


--- Page 100 ---
94 Lesson8 THE PHYSICIAN'S PURPOSE

time. ;
For a more serious burn, a pad shouid be rung out in a

solution of 6 drops of Urtica Urens mother tincture to a quarter
of a pint of water (warm or cold). Cover the burn with this to
keep out the air and bandage. At intervals when the pad dries,
pour on more tincture without removing the pad from the
wound.

Give Urtica Urens 30 at the same time — 2 pills every hour
for three doses and then a dose when needed, 1.e. when the pain

returns.

TEST PAPER No. 8

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

1. What factors would you take into consideration when
interviewing a patient for the first time.

2. Prepare an imaginary case paper for a nervous young man
who complains ofa hard and painful cough.

3. What must you avoid when interviewing a patient and
why.

4, Name four modalities of Bryonia.


--- Page 101 ---
Lesson $

AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS

‘Since diseases, as dynamic derangements of the vital charac-
ter, express themselves solely by alteration of the sensations and
functions of our organism, this alone can be the object of
treatment in every case of disease. For, on the removal of all
morbid symptoms nothing remains but health.’

‘Nobody has ever seen ‘Anaemia’, ‘Scarlatina’ or a ‘Head-
ache’, stalking abroad as a separate entity. Symptoms are the
language in which the disturbing forces, which we know as disease,
speak to us.’

Thus Hal: aann and Clarke describe symptoms — the
language of nature telling of the internal disturbance of the sick
person. From these quotations we realise:

1. That disease cannot be recognised except by its morbid
signs and symptoms.

2. Disease can manifest itself in many different forms and
under different conditions.

The problem, then, is how to find the remedy which will
extinguish a disease manifesting itself to our senses by these
morbid signs and symptoms. [t is essential to consider the
following points:

1. A selection must be made from the mass of symptoms
presented, and the remedy must be based on this
selection.

no

. The symptoms presented must be graded according to
their respective values.

3. In order to match the remedy to the symptoms it is essen-

tial to know the remedies intimately and recognise those

symptoms which characterise the patient.

Most reliance then, should be placed upon the symptoms
which signify the individual patient, and particular attention

95 ‘


--- Page 102 ---
96 AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS | Lesson 9

must be paid to those symptoms which are peculiar to or
characteristic of the patient, and no/ those which are common
to the disease.

For this purpose symptoms can be graded into three main
groups:

1. Generals — those general to the patient as a whole.

2. Particulars — those particular, not to the patient as a
whole but to some part of him.

3. Common — those which are common to all cases of a
certain disease.

Generals:

These are the symptoms which are general to the patient as a
whole. When a man is unwell, he usually refers to himself as ‘I’
feel this or that. For example, he states ‘1 cannot stand the hot
weather’, or ‘I always fcel worse in the morning’.

There are three grades of Generals:

1. The mental symptoms, if well-marked, are of the greatest
importance, taking preference over all other indications.

This is of such importance that the mental disposition of the
patient often determine the selection of the remedy which will
be homocopathic to the whole case. For example: the emotional
tension and fear of death of Aconite; the feeling of brittleness of

Thuja.

2. Next in importance come the Modalities — the reaction of
the patient to bodily environment, to heat and cold, damp
and dry, position, time, etc. Examples of these indications
are found in the pains of Bryonia and Rhus Tox. — the one
being aggravated while the other is improved by motion.
Aconite is aggravated by cold East winds — Belladonna is
aggravated by noise and lying down but better in a sitting
position.

The times of day at which symptoms occur or are aggra-
vated have been listed separately as these are often of great
value in determinig the homoeopathic remedy.

We must also bear in mind that drugs often have a more
pronounced action on one side of the body than the other,


--- Page 103 ---
AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9 97

and where this phenomena is observed the rernedy chosen
should have that same modality.

CO

. The third grade of Generals relate to Desires and Aversions.
These must be recent changes and must be distinct long-
ings and loathings. For example, when a person states that
he has never drunk beer, but since he felt unwell he longs
for a glass, then it is a reliable indication. Buta mere like or
dislike is of little value.

Particulars:

These are the symptoms which bring the person for treat-
ment, but are of less value when finding the remedy. They are
applicable only to some part of the patient, hence his remarks
will be prefixed with ‘My’. For example, ‘My shoulder is very
stiff, or ‘My headache is always worse when I go out in the
wind’.

{tis important to remember that sometimes the generals are
made up of particulars. For example, if after examining the
particulars of every region it is found that there are certain
symptoms running through the particulars, those symptoms
become generals. For instance, the patient has a dry cough, his
stool is hard and dry, he has a large thirst — when we can see
that the characteristic symptom ‘Dryness’ runs through the whole
case.

Common Symptoms:

These are the symptoms you would expect to find in a person,
with a particular complaint. For example, if the patient had a
fever you would expect him to be thirsty. If the case were Scarlet
Fever you would expect the rash to appear. These are diag-
nostic symptoms and arc useful only if qualified in some way. For
instance, the fact that a patient is thirsty as a result of his
illness is of no particular value in deciding the remedy, but ifitis
observed that although thirsty he only takes small sips of water
al any one time, then the symptom becomes qualified.

Characteristic Symptoms:

Hahnemann, in the Organon, stressed the importance of
securing resemblance above all things in those symptoms which
are peculiar to each individual drug. He wrote ‘In search fora


--- Page 104 ---
98 AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9

Homoeopathic specific remedy . - . the more striking, singular,
uncommon and peculiar (characteristic) signs and symptoms of
the case of disease are chiefly and almost solely to be kept in
view; for it is more particularly with these that very similar ones
in the list of symptoms of the selected medicine must corres-
pond, in order to constitute it the most suitable for effecting the
cure... Ifthe antitype constructed from the list of symptoms of
the most suitable medicine contain those peculiar, uncommon,
singular and distinguishing (characteristic) symptoms, which
are to be met with in the disease to be cured in the greatest
number and in the greatest similarity, this medicine is the most
appropriate Homoeopathic specific remedy for this morbid
stale.’

Characteristic symptoms, then, are zadividual symptoms, and
when studying Materia Medica one should endeavour to
memorise the peculiarities of cach drug which are not met with
in any other and which serve consequently to individualise and
give character to the drug which produces them.

Dr. Kent summed up this class of symptom graphically when
he wrote: “he things that characterise are things to make you
hesitate, to make you meditate. Suppose that you have been
acquainted with a large number of cases of measles, for in-
stance, but along comes one of which you say to yourself ‘That is
strange, I never saw such a thing as that before in a case of
measles. It is peculiar.’ You hesitate, you meditate, and at once
recognise it as something individual, because it is strange and
rare and peculiar. You say, ‘I do not know what remedy has
that symptom.’ Then you commence to search your repertory,
or, consult those of more experience, and you find in the
repertory, or upon consultation, that such a medicine has that
thing as a strong feature, as a high grade symptom, and it is as
peculiar in the remedy as in your patient, though you have
never seen it before. You may have seen a hundred cases of
measles without seeing that very thing. That peculiar thing that
you see in measles relates to the patient and not to the disease,
and as the sole duty of the physician is to heal the sick that
peculiar thing will open the whole case to the remedy. When
you find that the remedy has that symptom, along with the
other symptoms, you must attach some importance to it, and

when there are two or three of these peculiar symptoms they
form the characteristic features.’


--- Page 105 ---
AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9 99

So we see that all symptoms have value, the more charac-
teristic of the patient they are, the more valuable on which to
prescribe.

Sometimes it is difficult to decide which are the general and
which are the particular symptoms. Let us refer again to “Dr.
Kent:

‘To distinguish between what is predicted of the patient and
what is predicted ofa part is an essential in the study of Materia
Medica. Everything that is predicted of the patient is general,
everthing that is predicted of a part is a particular. The two may
be opposite and hence the student of the Materia Medica will
sometimes be worried because he will find aggravation from
motion and relief from motion recorded under the same
remedy. It is only from the sources of the Materia Medica —i.e.
the provings, and from the administration of the remedy that
we may observe what is true of a part and what is true of the
whole. We find at times a patient wants to be ina hot room with
the head out of the window for reliefof the head. In that case the
head is relieved from cold and the body is relieved from heat.
This is a typical symptom of Phosphorus, which has relief from
cold as to the head and stomach symptoms but aggravation
from cold as to its chest and body symptoms. ‘I want to go out in
the open air and I want to take cold things into my stomach’;
but if he has chest symptoms and pain in the extremities he
says: “{ want to go into the house and keep warm.’ And just as
we see thus in patients it is so in the study of a remedy; we must
discriminate.’ .

Finally, though of great importance, come those symptoms
designated by Hahnemann as being ‘Strange, rare and pecu-
liar’. These are the symptoms which characterise ¢his illness in
this patient, whether they be generals or particulars.

Note: The student will find the word ‘Keynote’ mentioned in
many Homoeopathic books. The word appears to have been
used by Dr. H.N. Guernsey originally and refers to the charac-
teristic symptom or symptoms of a drug. He stated: ‘The key-
note is only meant to state some strong characteristic symptoms
and on referring to the Symptom Codex (Materia Medica), all
the others will surely be there if this one is. There must be a
head to everything; so in symptomatology — if the most interior
or peculiar, or keynote is discernible, it will be found that all the
other symptoms of the case will be also found under that


--- Page 106 ---
100 AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9

remedy which gives existence to this peculiar one, if that
remedy is well proven. It will be necessary, in order to pre-
scribe efficiently, to discover in every case that which charac-
terises one remedy above another, in every combination of
symptoms that exists. There is certainly something, in every
case of illizss, which pre-eminently characterises that case, or
causes it to differ from every other. So in the remedy to be
selected, there is or must be a combination of symptoms, a
peculiar combination, characteristic or, more strikingly, key-
note. Strike that and all others are easily touched, attuned or
sounded. There is only one keynote to any piece of music,
however complicated, and that note governs all the others in the
various parts, no matter how many variations, trills, accom-
paniments, etc.’

ANALYSIS OF THE CASE

If the case has been taken correctly the next step is to study
the symptoms so that the true remedy, suitable to the patient
may be ascertained.

We see from the mass of detail acquired at the case-taking
that the symptoms listed fall into two main groups:

1. Diagnostic: Symptoms from which the disease can be
diagnosed. These are usually common symptoms which
are of little value in helping to find the remedy, but the
remedy finally selected must include in its pathogenesis
one or more of these diagnostic symptoms in order to cover
the condition completely.

2. Selective: Those symptoms which are true and charac-
teristic symptoms of the patient and from which the cura-
tive remedy is selected. They will be found among the
Mental Symptoms, Modalities, Desires and Aversions
and Unusual Symptoms.

Mental Symptoms:

These are the symptcms which point strongly to the men-

tality of the individual and can be divided irto three grades:
1. The Will,


--- Page 107 ---
AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9 10]

2. Perversions of Understanding and
3. Perversions of Memory.

1. In sickness the patient’s nature often becomes changed
and the mental symptoms show up strongly. For example,
the patient may become very irritable, quarrelsome and
spiteful; he may turn from those nearest and dearest to
him; become tearful; or dislike sympathy. These
symptoms may ke very difficult to obtain when taking the
case as the patient may try to hide them as much as
possible. (A man will hardly confess to being extremely
irritable; yet his wife may take the practitioner aside and
whisper to him ‘Please, can you do something about his
temper!) Other first-grade mentals include such
symptoms as result from grief, disappointed love, bad
news, jealousy.

2. Perversions of understanding are manifested in delusions,
hallucinations, dullness of comprehension, clairvoyant
states, imbecility.

3. Perversions of memory include symptoms such as absent
mindedness, mistakes in writing and speech, failure to
remember names, inability to concentrate.

Whenever the mental symptoms are marked, especially if changed

from normal, they are of the uimosl importance to an analysts of the
case. The selected remedy must include the mental symptoms to be
curative.

Dr. Kent illustrated the above when he wrote: ‘Irritability
and mental depression run through a great many remedies, and
form the centre around which revolve all the mental symptoms
in some cases. The reason that these are more interior than
some other symptoms of the mind is that these relate to the
affections themselves. The mental symptoms can be classified
in a remedy. The things that relate to the memory are not so
important as the things that relate to the intelligence, and the
things that relate to the intelligence are not so important as the
things that relate to the affections cr desires or aversions. —

‘We see in a state of irritabiity that the patient is not irritable
while doing the things he desires to do; if he wants to be talked


--- Page 108 ---
102 AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9

to, for instance, you do not discover his irritability while talking
to him. You never discover he is irritable if you do the things he
wants you to do. But just as soon as you do something he does
not want, this irritability, or disturbance of the will is brought
on, and this is the very innermost of the man’s state, that which
he wishes belongs to that which he wills, and the things that
relate to what he wills are the most important things in every
proving. You may say that an individual is sad, but he is sad
because he lacks something that he wants; he desires something
which he has not and becomes sad for it; sadness may go on to
such an extent that the mind is in confusion.’

Modalities:

These are influences which aggravate or ameliorate the
whole person, or the particular complaint or organ. They are
found in the answers to questions relative to the time of day or
night, reaction to temperature, weather, motion, position,
cating, menstruation in females etc. Examples are the pains of
Rhus Tox., improved by continued movement, those of Bryonia
aggravated. Arsenicum is worse after midnight, while Lyco-
podium is worse between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.

Modalities are marked in Homoeopathic books by the sign:

< Worse or aggravated by

> Better or ameliorated by

Unusual Symptoms:

These constitute what Hahnemann termed ‘Strange, Rare
and Peculiar,’ and comprise all those symptoms which cannot
be explained. For example, ifa person has a sore throat it would
be reasonable for him to desire soothing fluids only. If then the
person states that his throat feels better from swallowing solids,
that is unusual and search must be made to find whether any
remedy has that symptom in its pathogenesis.

_ Dr. Kent stressed the importance of Hahnemann’s instruc-
tions as follows: ‘When looking over a list of symptoms, first
discover three, four, five or six, Or as Many symptoms as exist
that are strange, rare and, peculiar; strange, rare and peculiar
must apply to the patient himself.

“When you have settled on three or four or six remedies that
have these characteristic symptoms, then find which of them is


--- Page 109 ---
AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9 103

most like the rest of the patient's symptoms, common and
particular.

‘When you have taken a case on paper, you will settle the
symptoms that cannot be omitted in each individual. Get the
strong, strange, peculiar symptoms, and then see to it that there
are no gencrals in the case that oppose or contradict. For
example, if you see the keynotes of Arsenicum, make sure that
ihe patient is chilly, fearful, restless, weak, pale, must have the
pictures on the wall straight, and Ars. will cure.’

The Curative Remedy:

‘The curative remedy, then, will be one in whose pathogenesis
is found the true characteristic symptoms of the patient. In
other words, all those symptoms of which the patient com-
plains, plus the all-important peculiar characteristic and
mental symptoms of the patient, must be considered. The
remedy which includes these symptoms will be the correct
homoeopathic one to cure the patient.

Read Chapter 9 of Roberts’ The Principles and Art of Cure by
Homoeopathy

CHINA

Characteristics

Extreme debility after excessive loss of fluids and consequent
debility, (diarrhoea, vomiting, haemorrhage etc.) after pro-
longed strain and overwork. Great flatulence with sensation as
if the abdomen were packed !ull; not ameliorated by eructations
or passing flatus. Excessive sensitiveness. especially to light
touch, draught of air. Hard pressure relieves. Worse every other
day. Sweats on least exertion.

AMfind: Great irritability worse at night.

Head: Pain congestive, throbbing. like many hamnicrs
on temples. better hard pressure.

Afouth: Bitter taste. even water tastes bitter.

Stomach: Total loss of appetite. Pull feling after the feast
1ocd, but beiehing euiv anielieraies tempore.

Digestion is slaw and Chine is one of tie mes!
Jatulent reniectes.

Stacks: ‘These patients ere prance to diarrhea whist, te


--- Page 110 ---
104 AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS Lesson 9

very debilitating. Stools acrid; undigested;
watery; bilious; black; painless; profuse and
putrid.
Modalities: | Worse slight touch; least draught of air; every
other day. Better hard pressure.

China is given mostly after loss of fluids when there is very
great debility and other complaints — there may be profuse
haemorrhages with faintness, loss of sight and ringing in the
ears.

The modalities are: worse slight touch, least draught of air,
every other day — better by hard pressure on the painful part.

When a patient is very debilitated, think of China and on
taking the case you will very often find ‘loss of vital fluids’ such
as profuse leucorrhoea.

China is a very flatulent remedy and should be compared
with Carbo veg., and Lycopodium. Guernsey states ‘Uncom-
fortable distention of the abdomen with a wish to belch up, or a
sensation as if the abdomen were packed full, not in the least
relieved by eructation’. The impaired digestion is shown by a
tendency to diarrhoea especially from eating fruit.

Note the watery stools which are painless.

This is the drug which Hahnemann first proved to discover
on what principle it so acted and the following is part of his
pictue of China:

‘A very small dose of China acts for hardly a couple of days
but a large dose, such as employed in ordinary practice, acts for
several weeks, ifnot got rid of by vomiting or diarrhoea and thus
ejected. If the homoeopathic law be right — as it incontestably
is right without any exception, and is derived from pure obser-
vation of nature, viz: that medicines can only easily, rapidly and
permanently cure, where the disease-symptoms match the drug
disease-symptoms discovered by the administration of the drug
to healthy persons, then we find, on a consideration of the
symptoms of China, that this medicine is adapted for but few
diseases, but that where it is accurately indicated, owing to the
immense power of its action, one single, very small dose will
often effect a marvellous cure.’

He goes on to say ‘I say Cure, and by this I mean a recovery
undisturbed by after sufferings. Have practitioners of the
ordinary stamp another, and to me unknown idea of what con-


--- Page 111 ---
AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS — Lesson 9 105

stitutes cure? Will they call cures the suppression by this drug of
agues lor which bark is unsuited? I know that almost al! peri-
odic discases, aud almost all agues, even such as are not suited
to China must be suppressed and lose their periodic character
by this powerful drug administered usually in enormous ahd
oft-repeated doses; but are the poor sufferers thereby really
cured? Has not their previous disease undergone a irans-
formation into another and worse disease? Thus, they no longer
complain of their paroxysms appearing on certain days and at
certain hours but note the earthy complexion of their puffy
faces, the dullness of their eyes! See how oppressed is their
breathing, how hard and distended is their epigastrium, how
tensely swollen their loins, how miserable their appetite, how
perverted their taste, how oppressed and painful their stom-
achs by all food, how undigested and abnormal their faecal
evacuations, how anxious dreamfu! and unrefreshing their
sleep. Look how weary, how joyless, how dejected, how irrit-
ably sensitive or stupid they are, as they drag themselves
about.’

And this is what China in small doses can — and does cure.

China has proved of great value to patients who after an
attack of influenza craw! about feeling that they would never be
well again.

CARBO VEG.

Characteristics:

Desire for air — wants to be fanned. Burning internally —
cold externally. Skin cold: cold sweat. State of collapse. (Some-
times from surgical shock.) Flatulence.

Mind: Timid; slowness; sluggish; lazy.

Head: Vertigo after slightest movement. Pain pressive;
worse warmth of bed. Pain from being over-
heated. Pain burning and throbbing worse
breathing deeply. Pains better eructations.

Nose: Nose feels cold.
Face: Face flushes after drinking wine.
Stomach: Weak digestion with enormous production of

flatulence, better eructations. Excessive accumu-
lations of gas, feels full and tense. Flatulence


--- Page 112 ---
106 AN ANALYSIS OF SYAIPTOMS — Lesson 9

worse milk. Flatulent colic worse lying. Symp-
toms worse wine; worse warmth, worse evening.

Respiratory: Dry, hacking cough. distressing pauent. Cough
worse on entering cold air from warm room.
Rawness and soreness of larynx; hoarseness;
worse evening; worse warm, moist weather. Loss
of voice worse morning.

Limbs: Rheumatic pains better cructations. Feet and
hands cold; knees cold.
Modalities: Patient is better from eructations and {rom being

fanned. Worse morning on waking. Perspiration
copious and cold.

This is a Corpse reviver and in desperate cases of collapse,
where the patient is icy cold and demands to be fanned, it has
saved life.

LYCOPODIUM

Characteristics:

Hunger, but a little food seems to fill stomach and causes
fullness and distension of abdomen. Worse 4—8 p.m. Red
sediment in urine. Right sided — or complaints go from right to
left. Better warm drinks; worse cold food and drink. Fan-like
movement of alae nas? (nostrils). Suddenness — sudden flashes
of heat; lightning like pains; sudden satiety; pains and symp-
toms come and go suddenly.

Mind: Very nervous, sensitive. cmotional person;
apprehensive. Apprehensive of undertaking any-
thing yet he is al] right when he does it. Likes his
own company but prefers somebody to he in the
house in another room. Fmotional and weeps
when thanked.

Head: Bursting, pressing headaches. Headaches better
when catarrh is worse. Worse 4—8 p.m.

Nose: Must breathe through mouth at night.

Throat: Sore right side or going from right to teft. Worse
4—8 pam. Better wari drinks. Tf vou hea:
pauient complaining ela feeling as though a bali
is rising into the tirest from below —- a dase of

Lycopodium will cure.


--- Page 113 ---
AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS | Lesson 9 la?

Stomach: Patient feels vers hungry but alter a lew mouth
iuls becomes full up. bloated and uncomlortable.
Is distended like a drum and says ‘everything |
cat turns to wind’. Cannot eat oysters. This is one
of a trio of flatulent remedies with Carbo Veg.
and China. China bloats the whole abdomen,
Carbo Veg. prefers the upper part and Lyc. the
lower part. China has fullness after a normal
meal and Lyc. after eating little.

Unnary: Sediment like red sand in urine.

Respiratory: — Sutches in L chest and during inspiration. Very
difficult breathing.

Back. Burning between scapulae as of hot coals.

Extremiies: | One foot hot and the other cold.

Sleep: Patient is worse in the evening and better on
waking but wakens cross and irritable.

Modalines: If vou have a patient with at least three of the

following modalities and the other symptoms of
the case fit then you can be sure that Lyco-
podium is the correct remedy.

Worse afternoon — Desires hot drinks
Worse 4+ p.m.—8 p.m. -— Craves sweets

Has Urinary troubles — Has acidity and
bloating and wind.

Better by motion, warm food and drink, in the
open air, being uncovered, after midnight.

Kent savs “Though classed among inert substances and
though: to be useful for rolling up allopathic pills Hahnemann
brought it into use and developed its power by attenuation. It
enters deep intc the life. There is nothing about man that Lyco-
podium does not rouse into tumult.’

Dr. Kent explains that the Lycopodium patient wants io be
alone butlikes to feel that somebody ts in the next room because
he fears to be alone. He also fears death — and the dark. This
patient weeps when meeting a fmend, is ured with chronic
fatigue — is forgetful. and therefore kas aversion to under-
taking anything new. The mind of the Lycopodium patient is
better developed than the body — they often look older than
they really are.


--- Page 114 ---
108 AN ANALYSIS OF SYMPTOMS — Lesson 9
i
‘The Lycopodiuin patient anticipates things and is nearly sick
until they happen; then he goes through everything feeling on
top of the world. He cannot think how he can make a speech but

when he gets on his feet he feels quite confident.

TEST PAPER No. 9

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

1. What kind of symptoms would you regard as:

(a) General
(b) Mental

(c) Particular
2. Why is it wrong to prescribe only on particulars?

3. What have the three remedies Lycopodium, Carbo Veg
and China in common?

4. Give four characteristics of Lycopodium.


--- Page 115 ---
Lesson 19
REPERTORISING

Having taken the case we must now find the remedy and our
NENT step Is to decide which one can be used as an eliminating
svmptom. By this we mean that where. for instance. a person
states “{ cannot stand the cold weather’ it is useless to consider
remedies which are characterised by beng predominanily for
“hot people’. One of these remedies may seem to be well indi-
cated but unless it presents a picture of the patient as a whale it
is not the correctly indicated remedy.

Our eliminating symptom must. therefore, be:

1, Anindividual characteristic of the patient.

2. A selective symptom of importance — Le. a strong madal-

IY.

3. ft should have a reasonable number of remedies in the
rubric so as not to limit our choice without further veri-
fication.

The climinative symptoin determines our primary list of
remedies. i.e. the correct remedy will be one of those mentioned
in the repertory under this particular syniptom.

‘Yo illustrate these instructions let us work through the symp-
toms of the simple example of the acute ease we have aiready
discussed.

The character of the headavhe is very pronounced — split-
ting or bursting — and it must therefore be a strong charac-
teristic of the chosen remedy for it to be curative. Let us use it as
our eliminative symptom. Various other remedies are :.oted in _
the Repertory but for this case we shall! only consider those with
which you are already familiar. Bee ing in mind that there is
also restlessness and anxiety and a2 ho: dr skin with a quick
pulse. our choice will lie between A-cnite and Beiladonna. In
order to decide which of these two remedies is the better indi-

109


--- Page 116 ---
[10 REPERTORISING (Lesson du
cated reference must now be made to the Materia Medica.

In the Materia Medica Pura, Hahnemann gives an example
of case analysis which has been quoted many times in Homoco-
pathic literature. We give this example below as an iustration
of how the characteristic symptoms guide unerringly to the
correct remedy.

‘Sch ... a washerwoman, somewhere about forty years old,
had been more than three weeks unable to earn her bread when
she consulted me on September I, 1815.

1. On any movement, especially at every step, worse on
making a false step, she has a shock in the pit of the
stomach, that comes as she avers, every time from the left
side.

2. When she lies she feels quite well; then she has no pain
anywhere, neither in the side nor at the pit ofthe stomach.

3. She cannot sleep after 3 a.m.

+. She relishes her food, but when she has eaten a little she
feels sick.

5. Then water collects in her mouth and runs out of it like

water-brash.

6. She has frequent empty eructations after every meal.

7. Her temper is passionate, disposed to anger. When the
pain is scvere she is covered with perspiration. The
calamenia was quite regular a fortnight since.

{n ether respects her health is good.’

Hahnemann then describes how he decided on the indicated

remedy .

. “Now as regards Symptom |, Belladonna, China and Rhus
Tox., cause shcoting in the pit of the stomach on making a false
step, but none of them on/y on movement, as is the case here.
Pulsatilla certainly causes shooting in the pitof the stomach on
making a false step, but only as a rare alternating action, and
has neither the same digestive derangements as occur here at 4
compared with 3 and 6, nor the same state of the disposition.

‘Bryonia alone has ariong its chiefalternating actions. as the

whole list ofits symptoms demonstrates, pain from movement, and
especially shooting pains, as also stitches beneath the sternuin
(in the pit of the stomach) on raising the arm, and on making a


--- Page 117 ---
REPERTORISING Lesson 10 lil

false step it causes shooting in other parts.

“The neganve symptom 2 met with here answers especially te
Bryonia; few medicines (with the excepuon. perhaps. of Nax
Vomica and Rhus Tox.. in their alternating action — neither af
which, however, 1s suitable for the other symptoms; show a
complete relief to pains during rest and when lying: Bryonia
does, however, in an especial manner.

‘Symptom 3 is met with in several medicines. and also in
Bryonia.

‘Svmptom +4 is certainly. as far as regards sickness after
eating, met with in several other medicines ([gnatia. Nux
Vomica, Mercurius. Ferrum, Belladonna. Pulsatilla.
Cantharis), but neither as constantly and commonly. nor with
relish for food. as in Brvonia.

“As regards symptom 3. several medicines certainly cause a
flow of water like water brash, just as well as Bryonia: the others
however, do not produce symptoms similar to the remaining
ones. Hence Brvonia is to be preferred to them in this
particular.

‘Empty eructations fof wind only) after eating (syinptcm 5) Is
found in few medicines, and in none so constantly. so commonly
and to such a degree as in Brvorna.

‘To 7, one of the chief symptoms in diseases (see Organon,
sec. 213) is the ‘‘State of the disposition’. and as Brvonia causes
this symptom also in an exactly similar manner. Brvonia is for
all these reasons preferred in this case to all other medicines as
the homoeopathic remedy.

Thus Hahnemann decided on the one remedy which was
homoeopathic to the case. He goes on tu describe how the
remedy was prescribed and the result:

“Now as this woman was very robust, and the force of the
disease must consequently have been very considerable to pre-
vent her, on account of the pain, deirg any work. and as her
vital powers, as stated, were not impairea. ! gave her one of the
strongest homoeopathic doses. a full drop of the undiluted juice
of Bryonia root to be taken immediately, and bade her come to
me again in forty-eight hours. I told-my friend E. who was
present, that within that ume the woman would assuredly be
quite cured; but he, being but haif converted te homoeopathy.
expressed his doubts ahout it. Five days afterwards he came
again to learn the result, but the woman did not return then,


--- Page 118 ---
1i2 REPERPORISING | Lesson 10

and in fact, never came back again. { couid not allay the
impatience of my friend by telling him her name and that ol'the
village where she lived, about a mile-and-a-half off. and
advising him to seek her out and ascertain for himself how she
was. This he did and her answer was ‘What was the use of my
going hack? The very next day I was quite well, astamosullii
am extremely obliged to the doctor, but the likes of us lave no
time to leave off our work, and for three weeks previously my
ilness prevented me earning anything.’

The following is an example ofa case taken and repertorised:

Jan. 20th 1956
Mr S. Married man, aged 56, dark, dark eves. face vellowish
and whites of eyes, called and stated:

Particulars

In the 1914/18 war went deaf in the right ear. Operated on
(as it was steadily getting worse) in 1955. to remove, what the
ear specialist said, was a fungus growth around the cardrum.
Can only hear now with this ear with a hearing aid. The right
ear-which was G.K. is new so bad that he can’t hear at all.

Years ago had a drawing pain in the left hip. This went and
there followed in the left thigh, a sudden stab like burning pain:
and after this there develcped a cramping pain, which used to
come on suddenly when walking. When sitting a continuous
dull ache better temporarily by constantly changing position.

Now the pain commences in the left ankle, and starts with a
burning pain, which moves to the left knee, and then to the
thigh which is worse by heat. When the pain reaches the thigh.
a sort of sudden internal explosion in the thigh takes place.
which throws the leg up and is worse at night and the warmth of
bed. Grinds his teeth in sleep.

He HIMSELF loathes DAMP COLD WEATHER, and is
better in the warmth.

Past History

1. In the nineteen-twvernties had two small hard warts, one on
the left side of his forehead. the other below the larynx.


--- Page 119 ---
REPERTORISING Lesson 10 113

‘Phe one on the head was burnt off with nitrate of silver.
Vhe other he picked, and it eventualiy went.

2. Asa child he fainted very easily for no reason.

3. Father was crue! and constantly used a hunting-crop‘on
his bovs.

+. Has had pleurisy worse left side.

HIMSELF

Dishkes consolation and fuss, makes him very irritable.
impatient.

Dislikes company.

Worse room full of people.

Conscientious about trifles.

Worse greasv (fat foods).

Thirstless.

Worse external constriction.

Occasional! burning pain AFTER urinauon.
Fainting easily as a child.

Grinding teeth in sleep.

In searching for the remedy, as HE HIMSELF toathes Gotd
damp weather, we can eliminate ALI. remedies which are
WORSE by HEAT.

Now this ts how we worked out the remedy.

Worse consolation and fuss. Ars-Bell-Calc-Phos. tHeli-fGN,
SEP, SIL.

Impatient. Ars, IGN, SEP, Sil.
Aversion to company. iGN, Sep.
Room full of people. Sep.
Conscientious over trifles. Sep. flow)
Worse greasy (fat) foods. Sep.
Thirstless. Sep.

Worse external constriction. Sep.
Burning after urination. Sep ‘low)
Fainting. SEP.


--- Page 120 ---
114
Grinding teeth in sleep. Sep. (low)

Particulars
Drawing pain in hip. Sep.

Stitching pain thigh, internally. SEP.
Burning pain. SEP.

Cramp, thigh. Sep.

Pain sudden. Sep (low)

Better motion of affected part. Sep.

Worse night. SEP.
Pain moves upwards. SEP.

Warts hard. Sep.
Warts small. Sep.
Worse left side. SEP
Face vellow. SEP
Eves yellow. SEP.

Sepia is therefore the mostsintia: remedy.

PULSATILLA

Characteristics:

REPERTORISING

Lesson 10

Patient must have tresh air, although she is chilly. Worse in
warm stufly room, Better moving about slowly. Cannot tolerate
fats or rich greasy teods. Phirsdless. Changeable — pains
wander; no two chills are alike; no two stools are alike; menstru-

auion Is never the same and soon.

Mind: Patient can weep easily: affectionate but can also

be very irritable.

Head: Pains better whilst moving about slowly in coo!
air. Likes to sleep with head high — raised with

two or three pillows.

: ;
Nose: Discharge bland. yellow-green mucus.

Mouth: Dry without thirst. Expectoration bitter. Burnt

lastesin mouth.


--- Page 121 ---
REPERTORISING — Lesson [0 j15

Better moving slowly. Worse warm stuffy rooms:
worse fat and greasy foods.

Stomach: Very easily disordered wy fats. Intolerance of fat
and rich food. :
Modalities: Better in cold air and from cold applications.

Hahnemann says “This very powerful plant produces many
symptoms in the healthy, which often corresponds to the mor-
bid symptoms commonly met with.’

The Pulsatilia patient seeks the open air — he is always
better vut of doors even though he is a chilly person. The open
air relieves vertigo, pains in head, eye symptoms, fluent coryza,
toothache, cough etc. Walking relieves vertigo, toothache,
sticking pains in stomach and liver, bruised pains in back and
knees.

But the Pulsatilla patient raust not get wet — this can mean
colic, attacks of mucous diarrhoea, rheumatism, suppressed
menses, etc. Note — the Pulsatilla patient is better for cold air,
cold dry air but not wet air.

The Pulsaulla patient 1s not hungry, not thirsty and not
constipated.

Keynotes Aversion to fat and rich food.
Chilly yet worse for heat.
Craves the open air.
Craves movement, if in pain, either physical or
mental.
Haemorrhages flow, stop and flow again.
Headaches better by tying up the head.
Wandering pains.

Although the psuent needing Pulsatilla cannot stand heat.
she is a chilly patient and must have air.

Pulsatiila teads all remedies ‘worse from heat’.

If you come across a patient suffering from ary aches, pains
or discomforts, and he or she wants to move slowly in the cool
air (or if she is in bed MUST have plenty of fresh air) is very
tearful and cannot tolerate any fats, then PULSATILLA will
cure — whatever you may call the a:ment. ©

The disposition of Pulsatilla is almost opposite te that of Nux
Vomica.

Silica is the chronic of Pulsaiilla.


--- Page 122 ---
116 REPERTORISING Lesson 10
ALLIUM CEPA

Dr. Clarke says ‘Allium Cepa covers more symptoms of the
common cold than any other remedy, as the well-known effects
of onions in producing tears would suggest.

Characteristics.

Symptoms worse in a warm room; better in open air; worse
again on returning to warm room. Burning. Inflammation and
increased secretion of mucous membrane. Neuralgic pais like
a long thread. (In face. neck and head.)

Head: Dull headache with coryza worse evening; better
™m-open air but worse when returning to warm
roorn. Pains in temples, occiput ane down neck.

Eyes: Flow of tears; excessive non-excoriating lachry-
mation of eyclids; worse evening. Burning.
Nose: Profuse watery discharge, with sneezing, acrid,

burning, excoriating nose and upper lip. Fluent
coryza better in open air and worse in warm
room. Worse evening and worse Spring.

Throat: Sensation as of a lump it) throat. Expectorations
of a lumpy mucus through posterior nares.
Burning. Pain in throat extending to ear.

Respiratory: ‘Tickling of larynx and constant inclination to
hack in order to clear throat. Cough from in-
haling cold air.

Modalities: | Worse warm rosm; worse evening; Better open
air and motion. Damp cold wind and weather
brings on colds.

TEST PAPER No. 10

This task should be-undertaken only when the student feels
confident that the lesson has been mastered. ‘There should be no
reference to bouks as this vould defeat the object.

1. Write up an imaginavy case history and then state which
you think would be the ¢ climinating symptom for repertori-
sing the case, and why.


--- Page 123 ---
Lesson 11
ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY :

Having decided on the one remedy which wil! be homoco-
pathic to the case we must know when and how it should be
administered in order to utilise its maximum effect.

A most important point to bear in mind is that in homoeo-
pathic dosage a drug does not act directly on a disease, but
stimulates the natural resistance of the body ts the disease. If,
therefore, after a single dose of the indicated remedy it becomes
apparent that the natural powers have been awakened it is not
only unnecessary Dut unwise to repeat the dose.

Hahnemann stated this as follows: ‘Perceptible and continued
Progress of improvenient in an acute or chronic disease is a
condition which, as long as it lasts. invariably counter-indicates the
repetition of any medicine whatever, hecause the beneficial effect
which the medicine continues to exert is aproaching its
perfection. Under these circumstances every new dose of any
medicine, even of the last one that proved beneficial, would
disturb the process of recovery.”

Rule |: Never repeat while improvement is maintained.

‘The same remedy may be given a second time when the
improvement which the first dose had produced . . . ceases to-
continue... when it beccmes evident thai the medicine has
ceased to act. the condition of the mind being the same as
before. and no new or troublesome symptoms having made
their appearance. All this would show that the same remedy is
again indicated.’

Rule 2: Repeat the same remedy on!y when improve-
ment ceases and the symptoms return in their
orignal form.

‘When there comes an end to the improvement. which has
gonc steadily forward though not to complete recovery. a

11?


--- Page 124 ---
118 ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY Lesson 11

precise examination of the present improved aspect of the
disease will show a small and altered symptom-group, to which a
second dose of the former medicine would na longer be suitably
homoeopathic. Another counter-ferce is required, more
adapted to the remaining phenomena of the clisease.”

Rule 3: Change the remedy when improvement ceases
and symptoms have altered.

Acute Disorders

Itis characteristic of acute illness that its onset and progress
is rapid ending cither in recovery or death. The body resources
are, therefore. being constantly called upon to expend vital
energy. In order to give maximum assistance to the body at this
time it is necessary to aid the vital force as frequently as
possible.

‘In acute aiseases the time for the repetition of the proper
remedy is regulated by the rate at which the disease runs its
course, here it may often be necessary to repeat the medicine in
twenty-lour, sixteen, twelve, cieht, tour hours, and jess, while
the medicine, without originating new complaints. continues to
produce uninterrupted improvement; but where this improve-
ment is not sufficiently marked, considering the dangerous
rapidity of the acute disease, the interval may be still further
lessened.

Repetition in acute cases, then, is regulated by the rate al
which the disease runs its course, provided the symptoms remain the
Same.

Occasionally .t will be found that in an acute case the seem-
ingly indicated ‘acute’ remedy does not have the desired effect
or, having at first produced an improvement, the improvement
does not hold. Here there is evidence that there is some chronic
background to the case which has not becn sufficiently con-
sidered. Later notes wili make this paragraph clearer and you
will know the course of action to adopt.

Chronic Diseases

A chronic disease is characterised bv its slow progress, show-
ing hitle tendency towards recovery. It is therefore reasonable
to assuine that undec treatment improvement will be governed
by the sarne characteristic, and a return to health will be cor-


--- Page 125 ---
ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY — Lesson 1) 119

respondingly slow.
Nevertheless. the rules apply regarding administration of the
remedies, viz:
Rule No.1: Never repeat while improvement is maintained.
Rule No.2: Repeat the same remedy only when improve-
ment ceases and the symptoms return to their
original form.

Rule No.3: Change the remedy when improvement ceases
and svmptonis have altered.

REMEDY REACTION

‘This eternal, universal law of Nature. that every disease 15
destroyed and cured through the sirnilar artificia! disease which
the appropriate remedy has the tendenc+ io excite. rests on the
following proposition: that only one disease can exist in the
bodv at any one time, and therefore one ciisease must vicld to
the other.’ (Organon)

‘Since diseases, as dynamic derangements of the vital
character express themselves solely by alterations of the
sensations and functions of our organism. that is. solely by an
aggregate of cognizable symptoms. this alone can be the object
of treatment in every case of disease. For. on the removal of all
morbid symptoms nothing remains but health.” (Materia
Medica Pura).

‘To every disease the organism reacts in a special and
individual way.” (Organon)

After the administration ot the similar remedy it 1s to be
expected that a reaction will take place — the greater the
similarity the greater the reaction — and in simple acute cases
improvement should be almest immediate. Failure to obtain
quick relief shows that the remedy selected was not a near
similar and the case must be re-taken.

In more serious acute cases there should still be a measure of
improvement. This may not be evidenged by immediate relief of
the symptoms, but may show itself by a calmer mental con-
dition, less pain, a drop in temperature in feverish conditions. a
more restiul sleep and so on. Hahnemann expressed it as


--- Page 126 ---
120 ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY Lesson 11

follows: ‘The condition of the mind and the general beha viour of
the patient are among the most certain signs of incipient
improvement. or of aggravation, In all diseases, especially in
acute ones. ==

Incipient improvement, however slight, is indicated by
increased sense of comfort; greater tranquillity and freedom of
mind; heightened courage and a return of naturalness in the
feelings of the patient.

‘The signs of aggravation, however slight they may be, are
the opposite of the preceding, and consist in an embarrassed.
helpless state of §nind, while the deportment, attitude, and
actions of the patient appeal {o our sympathy.’

In chronic conditions relief may not come for days. or even
wecks, and one must tell the patient of this fact from the outset
so that he will not become discouraged. Even in these cases,
however. there is often a striking improvement in the patient’s
mentality — he feels better in himself, though ihe syinptems of
which he complained may be no better or even worse.

Homoeopathic Aggra ‘tin:

‘Least of all, nee. we to be concerned when the usual custo-
mary symptoms are aggravated and show most prominenily on
the first days, and again on some of the following days. but
gradually less and less. This so-called homoeopathic aggra-
vation js a sign ofan incipient cure (of the symptoms aggravated
at present), which may be expected with certainty.” (Chrovic
Diseases}

Often the reaction to the remedy takes on the form of an
aggravation of the symptoms present. the aggravation being
usually dependent on whether the remedy was particularly well
selected and the patient very sensitive to that remedy, or the
potency of the rernedy not quite suitable. in disease, the patient
is very susceptible to a remedy which is capable of producing
similar symptoms in the healthy. and as mentione- in a
previous lesson. the potency should be carefully considered
betore administration in order to avoid. as far as possible, any
severe agerayauions.

Dr. Kent states: ‘Wheaever you find an aggravation comes
quickly, is short, and has been more or less vigorous. then you
will find improvement of the patient will be long... such is the
slight aggravation of the symptoms that occurs in the first hours


--- Page 127 ---
ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY  Lessen 11 121

after the remedy in an acute sickness, or during the first few
days in a chronic case.

‘In acute disease we scldom see anything like striking aggra-
vation unless the acute disease has drawn near death's door. or
is very severe... If the disease has ultimated itself in change of
tissue. then vou see striking aggravations. even aggravations
that cannot be recovered from.

"An aggravation of the disease means the patient is growing
weaker, the symptoms are growing stranger: but the true
homoeopathic aggravation, which is the aggravation of the
svrnptoms cf the patient while the patient is growing better. is
something that the physician observes after a true hamoeo-
pathic prescription. The true homoeopathic aggravation I say.
is when the sympioms are worse but the patient says ~'I feel
better’’.” (lectures on Homceopathic Philosophy)

From the toregoing we can now summarise as follows:

1. No change.
(a) The remedy wrongly selected or given in wrong
potency.
(b) Slow-acting remedy.
(c) Patient sluggish in reacting.
2. Steady improvement with no aggravation.

(a) Rernedy correct.

(b) No organic change and no tendency to organic disease.
3. Short and sirong aggravation followed by a slow and sure recovery.

(a) Remedy correct.

(b) Vigorous reaction indicates that there ts no structural _
change in the vital organs.

(c}) A reaction to be desired as there is aiways a rapid
improvement following a short and strong aggravation.

4. Long and severe aggravation followed by a slow and sure recovery.

(a) Remedy correct but must not be repeated unul its action
completely exhausted.

(b) Organic changes will have been in evidence before
remedy administered. Vital force of patient low, but
where the case is curable a general improvement in
heaith will be manifest.

5. Improvement limited.

(a) Remedy cerrect, but where the vital organs have been

much affected or after severe operations a complete


--- Page 128 ---
122 ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY — Lesson 1}

return to absolute health is not possible. Careful repeti-
tion of the remedy at infrequent intervals will keep the
patient comfortable.

6. Long aggravation followed by a slow dectine of the patient.

(a) Usually indicates that the case is incurable. This type of
reaction is only observed in advanced cases of discase
where much organic destruction has already taken
place.

7. Amelioration first wath aggravation after.

(a) An improvement appears to commence which lasts for

several days, but after a week or so all the symptoms are
worse than before the remedy was administered. Here
the remedy selected was not sufficiently deep-acting or
the case is incurable.
Allow sufficient time for the remedy to exhaust its
action and retake the case. A remedy selected on the
whole totality now exhibited may produce a curative
reaction.

Only by careful observation of the symptom before selecting
the remedy, and by careful observation of the reactions after the
administration of the remedy, car one know whether satis-
factory progress is being made in each individual case.

Read Chapter i4 of Roberts’ The Principles and Art of Cure by
Homoeopathy

SILICA

Characteristics: =
Want of grit-— moral and physical. “What silica is to the stalk
of grain in the field, it is to the human mind’.Worse antict-
pation. Coldness — lack of vital warmth even when taking exer-
cise; must be wrapped up, especially head. Suppressed sweal
especially of feet which is profuse and offensive. Gonstipation 7
stools protrude and then slip back again and again, weal
expulsive power. Weak puny children through defective assimi-
lation. Inflammations ending in suppurauion, heals after dis-
aken place. 2

ae rey Want of grit, moral and physical. Nervous itri-

table, weak, fainthearted, yielding disposition.


--- Page 129 ---
ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY Lesson [1 123

Head: Vertigo ascends from nape of neck to head, worse
‘ooking up. Pain beginning in nape of neck and
going up over head to eyes and settling over one
eye. usually the right, better pressure and wrap-
ping up head. :

Nose: Alternate fluent and dry coryza. Acrid and
corrosive mucus in nose. Coryza worse daytime.

Throat: Sore with an accumulation of mucus. Pain
similar to pricking of pins. Symptoms worse
evening.

Anus: Constipation. stool comes down with great dif-

ficulty; comes a little way through anus and then
slips back before it can be voided.

Back: Pain in base of spine (coccyx) worse riding in car.

Limbs: Drvness in tips of fingers. Nails brittle with white
spots. Feet cold. Profuse, offensive perspiration.

Skin: Sensitive — small wounds heal with difficulty
and suppurate profusely.

Modalities: | \Norse cold. draught, motion, open air, at new

moon. Better warm room, wrapping head up.

Patients needing this remedy are very sensitive to cold; they
take cold very easily especially when uncovering head or feet.
Better wrapping up head.

Silica is the chronic of Pulsatilla. Never use it in a high
potency where there is any history of T.B.

Remember Silica expels foreign bodies so be careful if the
patient has a history of any embedded shrapnel etc., which may .
be better undisturbed.

Dr. Tyler gives a clear picture ofa Silica child as follows:

‘Silica is dragged reluctantly in, not interested, not frighten-
ed. You see a pale, sickly suffering face. He doesn’t get on and
he doesn’t thrive — is irritable and grumpy — he is always at
the bottom ofhis class, shirks responsibility and is lacking in self
assertion and self confidence. He cannot think and fix his
attention on anything — he cannot read or write and yet is
worried over little things he has done wrong. He gets violent
attacks of headache, and complains that the back of his head is
cold. Complains of bursting head and wants it warm — wants it
tied up — he is always ill with the new mocn — he gets bad
coughs and expectorates lumpy yellow or green mucus — his
nails are rough and yellow and there is a feeling of a splinter in


--- Page 130 ---
124 ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY Lesson 11

his finger, or his finger gets red and throbs. His skin will not
heal, he gets festers when he scratches himself and with every
sore there is a sticking and burning pain. He is very thin. He is
very cold even in a warm room and cannot sleep for cold feet —
is cold up to his knees. But he sweats, especially at night. Has no
appetite and is always tired. Has frightful dreams. He has a very
offensive stool and the perspiration is very offensive, and his feet
perspire freely — and in between the toes. His stomach is hard
and swollen with lots of wind which smells.

And now, quoting from Dr. Clarke — ‘A curious symptom
and one of great value is this — ‘Fixed ideas; the patient thinks
only of pins, fears them, searches for them and counts them
carefully’. This symptom helped me to make a rapid cure of post
influenzal insanity in the case of a man, of bad family history,
one of whose sisters had become insane and drowned herself,
another sister being affected with lupus. The patient’s wife told
me one morning that he had been looking everywhere for pins.
Sil. 30 rapidly put an end to the search for pins and restored the
patient to his senses. Silica has another link with insanity in its
aggravation at the moon’s phases; epilepsy and sleep-walking
are worse at the new and full moon’.

Dr. Kent says: ‘The action of Silica is slow. In the proving it
takes a long time to develop the symptoms. It is suited,
therefore, to complaints that develop slowly. The long acting,
deep acting remedies are capable of going so thoroughly into
the vital disorders that hereditary disturbances are routed out.
The mental state.is peculiar. The patient lacks stamina. What
Silica is to the stalk of grain in the field, it is to the human mind.
When the mind needs Silica it is in a state of weakness, embar-
rassment, dread, a state of yielding. It is the natural compli-
ment and chronic of Pulsatilla, because of its great similarity; it
is Puls. only more so, a deeper, more profound remedy.

Silica is often called the Surgeon’s knife of the Homoeopath
because it is the remedy used to promote suppuration.

GELSEMIUM - :

Characteristics:
Mentally dull and sluggish with desire to be left alone.
Muscles relaxed and weak. Eyelids droop. Limbs heavy.


--- Page 131 ---
ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY Lesson 11 125

Thirstless. Internal and external trembling. Child suddenly
Starts and grasps the nurse and screams as if afraid of falling.

Mind: Mentally dull. Nervous patient. Excitement on
hearing bad news. Stage fright or examination
funk.

Head: Vertigo worse on sudden movement. Dull tired

ache at base of brain. Wants head raised on high
pillow and kept still. (Headache is often relieved
by profuse flow of urine.) Also ‘sick’ headache,
preceded by blindness — as head begins to ache
blindness disappears.

Eyes: Eyelids droop.

Throat: Dryness and burning.

Chest: Sensation as if the heart would stop beating if she
did not move about.

Neck and Muscles of neck feel bruised. All muscles feel

Back: bruised.

Limbs: Trembling in all limbs; deep seated dull aching

in muscles of limbs and in the joints. Trembling
worse mental emotions. Trembling with fear, has

to be held.

This patient complains of being so tired — he wants to lie
down and rest.

Modalities: | Motion aggravates most symptoms. Worse cold
damp weather. Better cold open air. Worse
damp weather.

‘One of the first things you hear from a patient
needing Gelsemium is “Doctor I’m so tired” ’.

IGNATIA

Characteristics: : .
This is a remedy of contraries, of symptoms which do not

make sense: i.e. all throat symptoms are better swallowing
someting hard like toast. Mental and. physical contrariness. _
Changeable mood and disposition. Twitchings. ; :
Mind: The remedy.of moods; gaiety alternating with
the disposition to weep. Suppressed grief with
long drawn sighs, much sobbing, desires ty he


--- Page 132 ---
126

Hedi:

Throat:
Stomach:
claus:

Modalities:

ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY Lesson 11

alone with ' er grief. Fears she will never sleep
again. Melancholy — sits in a vacant stare.
Worn out nervous patients. Hysteria. Impatient,
ocuarrelsome. angry.

Pain as if nail were driven out through the side of
head, better lving on it; particularly in highly
nervous and sensitive people. Headache symp-
toms are changeable and are worse coffee, smok-
ing, alcohol, cold winds, change of position;
better warmth, soft pressure and profuse flow of
urine.

All throat symptoms are better by swallowing
something hard like toast.

Empty faint weak feeling. Weak digestion but
lobster salad for supper does not upset him.
Pains sharp and stitching, shooting up into
rectum, better whilst sitting.

Better by heat and aggravated by cold.

TEST PAPER No. 11

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

1. When is it safe to repeat a remedy at short intervals?

2. What would you expect after giving a remedy in a chronic

case if:

(a) There was very limited improvement.
(b) Rapid improvement after a short, sharp aggravation.

3. When is it unwise to repeat a remedy?

Describe a patient who need Silica.


--- Page 133 ---
Lesson 12
DRUG RELATIONSHIPS

It has been observed in proving and in clir’. "ap,
that a relationship exists between certain renicdies. i. .s is
because the particular drugs originate from a similar source or
belong to the same botanical family or chemical group. Where
this relationship exists it will be found that certain features are
common to these remedies. For example, through the several
Calcium drugs — the Carbonate, and Phosphate, etc., — runs
th typical Calcium weakness and debility. Where [ron is the
active principle in remedies, such as Aconite, Belladonna. and
Ferrum Phos., there can be observed inflammatory states.

It is a good plan to study remedies in ‘family’ groups, noting
both the points of similarity and more especially the points of
difference. Dr. Nash’s book Leaders in Homoeopathic Therapeutics
will be helpful to you in this study.

Compatible Relationships

This term includes remedies which are complimentary io
each other, or which follow each other well. Often certain
remedies act better when prescribed in a series. For example,
Pulsatilla is followed well by such remedies as Arsenicum,
Lycopodium, Nux Vomica, Sepia, Silica and Sulphur.

A truly complimentary remedy is one which completes the
work done by the previous remedy. For example, Sulphur
completes the action of Aconite when all the good which can be
expected of that remedy is exhausted. Other examples are Calc.
Carb., following Belladonna; Natrum Mur., following Ignatia.

These following medicines are called the ‘chronics’ of the
‘acutes’ by some writers. Thus Ignatia is the acute and Nat.
Mur., is the chronic. Ignatia is for grief but if there are deeper
changes in the patient’s nature and character which may only
be shown after the Ignatia has been given, then Nat. Mur., is
the natural compliment, providing always that all other
symptom are in agreement. .

127


--- Page 134 ---
198 ; DRUG RELATIONSHIPS Lesson 12

Inimical Relationships
This is the opposite of the above. There is a lack of harmony

between the action of the drugs when following each other in the
treatment ofa case. Often it is observed that inimical remedies
have a similar pathogenesis and the action of the following drug
spoils the action of the original prescription. An example of this
can be observed where Sulphur follows Calcarea, or Rhus tox
follows Apis in skin troubles. Careful note should be made of the
relationship of the remedy as indicated in the Materia Medica
before making the next prescription.

Antidotal Relationship

Where untoward bad effects are observed after the admini-
stration of a remedy it may be necessary to antidote that
remedy. This may be achieved by giving a remedy which
matches the symptoms now apparent, and the remedy is
usually found to be one which has a similar action to that first
prescribed.

SPEEDY PRESCRIBING

It is sometimes necessary to treat a patient quickly, e.g. as a
result of a sudden injury, bad news, or an unexpected disaster
on a holiday. It is helpful if some remedies can be memorised
that apply generally to these causes; causes we may call
‘acquired’ because they do not strictly belong to or involve the
person’s temperament or nature. The list given below sets out
some of the causes most likely to be met with and the remedies
that could be administered safely in low potencies.

Anger: Arn., Bry., Cham., Chine.
Gels., Nux.v.

Bad Eggs: (eating) Carbo.v.

Bad Fat: (cating) Ars., Carbo.v.

Bad Fish: (eating) All.c., Arbo.a., Carbo.v.

Bad Food: (eating) Carbo.v.

Bad News: (hearing) Gels.

Bad Water: (drinking) All.c., Crotal.h

Bathing, cold: Mag. phos a

Bee-sting: Teh


--- Page 135 ---
DRUG RELATIONSHIPS Lesson 12

Bereavement:

Bites:

Dog-bites:

Blood-poisoning:

Bones, injuries to:

Bruises:

Burns and Scalds:

Coffee, abuse of:

Cold, with damp:

Cold, dry winds:

Damp. cold weather

Damp, cold winds, exposure
to

Damp sheets:

Damp warm weather:

Dentition:

Depressing Emotions:

Eating, excess in:

Emotions, depressing:
pleasurable, effects of:

Examination funk:

Eyes, Inuries to:

Eyes over-strain:

Fat:

Fear:

Feet wetting:

Fractures:

Fruit:

Grief:

Head, blow on:

Head, getting wet:

Ice-cream:

Nerves, injury to:

News, bad:

Pastry:

Punctured wounds:

Riding in carriage:

Storms:

Sun: (too much)

129

Ignatia
Hypericum, Ledum
Hydrophob.

Pyr.

Ruta, Symph.

Arn. Led., Ruta.
Urtica Urens.

Nux.v.

Dulce.

Acon., Hep.

Gels.

All.c., Calc.c.
Rhus.t.

Carbo.v.

Cham., Mag.Phos.
Gels

Bry., Nux.v.

Gels.

Coff.

Anac.,Gels.
Aconite.

Ruta.

Carbo.v., Ipec., Puls.
Acon.

Puls.

Ruta., Symph.
Ars., China.

Ars., Ign.
Hypericum.

Bell]., Rhus.t.
Puls.

Hypericum.

Gels.

Puls.

Hypericum, Ledum.
Cocc.

Gels., Phos.

Acon., Bell., Gels.. Glon.


--- Page 136 ---
130

DRUG RELATIONSHIPS — Lesson 12

HOMOEOPATHIC REMEDIES

In dealing with the actual remedies it will be necessary for
you to observe carefully certain rules. These may appear to be
simple and even unimportant but we can assure you that they
are of utmost importance. This will be evident to those students
who have learnt through this course and appreciate the very
delicate nature of the Homoeopathic medicines especially in
their higher potencies or attenuations.

Rule I:

Rule 2:

‘Rule 3:

Rule 4:

Remedies should never be stored in the light,
particularly bright sunlight, or near any strong
smelling soaps, powders or liquids.

Remedies should not be changed from one bottle
to another unless the bottle is first sterilised (i.e.
boiled for 20 minutes in a pan of water). This will
ensure that the vibrations of the remedies are not
disturbed. Impress on patients that they must
not change their remedies from the bottles or
boxes in which they receive them, to others
which for them may be more convenient. If pills
must be taken during a day when travelling, for
instance, the requisite number should be tipped
from the bottle into a clean envelope or piece of
clean paper.

If several remedies are being prepared for
different patients, the hands should be washed
between handling each remedy, under running
water.

Vessels in which medicines may have been
dissolved for easy administration to a patient,
and spoons which may have been used to
measure doses must be boiled for 20 minutes in
clean water before being used for other medicines
or purposes.

The Homoeopathic remedies are prepared
(potentised) from the mother tincture in the case
of herbs and plants and this is known by the sign
@. In some cases treatment is effected by the use


--- Page 137 ---
DRUG RELATIONSHIPS — Lesson 12 13]

of the mother tincture when [0 or 15 drops,
according to the remedy, are put into a small
glass of water.

The potentised remedies are obtainable in
pilules, tablets, granules, powders or liquids.
You will find that the pilules are for the greater
part the most convenient to use, but there will be
occasions when tablets will be preferable and on
others, granules or powders. It will make no
difference to the value of the medicine itself but
the different types of vehicle may have important
psvchological eflects on a patient. Thus while itis
sometimes advised to give 3 pills there is no real
advantage as it is always the quality of the
remedy that is important and not the amount
taken.

DIET

Like Homoeopathy, diet is very individual and ‘One man’s
meat is another man’s poison’.

When treating patients with Homoeopathic remedies
however, care should be taken regarding the diet of the patient,
and advice given accordingly.

Samuel Hahnemann said very definitely that the correct food
helped the remedies to work more quickly and effectively, and
therefore the following remarks should be of interest to all
students.

There is so much that is artificial in our foodstuffs today that
it is essential to advise patients to eat as much ‘Whole Food’ as

ssible.

Be Re hots wheat flour (stone-ground) should be
substituted for all bread and white flour products. ‘Bread is the
Staffof Life’ but it has been proved that white bread contributes
towards ill health and gives animals hysteria. o<

White sugar sweetens but leaves an acid reaction in the
system often contributing to poor dig-stion. :

"4 more crude form of sugar is molasses, the first pressing
from the cane. This is full of valuable mineral salts including

quantities of potassium and calcium and 1s of great value to


--- Page 138 ---
132 DRUG RELATIONSHIPS Lesson 12

those who suffer from inveterate constipation and digestive
disorders. :

A natural sugar is, of course, honey. A pure comb honey
applied to wounds and ulcers will act as an antiseptic and
powerful healing agent — but an application of blended honey
has been found to increase the inflammation.

Generally speaking it is wise to advise plenty of salads, con-
servatively cooked vegetables and fresh fruit; fish, eggs, meat
(preferably lamb) and poultry should be taken in moderation;
good wholemeal bread and butter.

Peppermint (including that in toothpaste) should be
avoided, also camphor, menthol, inhalents, disinfectants and
all strong smelling cosmetics and perfumes. These will interfere
with the delicate vibrations of the Homoeopathic remedies and
thus spoil their effective action in the cure of disease.

Milk should be taken in moderation and unpasteurised milk
bottled on the farm should be purchased if possible. Freshly
‘made weak tea should be taken in moderation; China tea is
much better than Indian. Fruit drinks made from fresh fruit
should be recommended; also bran tea flavoured with fruit
juices. Dandelion coffee can replace ordinary coffee and this is
excellent for liver and kidneys.

One last word of advice which has proved many times to be
valuable in the treatment of disease. Always enquire into the
kind of vessels patients use for cooking. Homoeopathy has
proved that many patients are definitely allergic to the poison-
ing effects of aluminium; when aluminium cooking pots have

. been replaced by stainless steel or enamel cooking pots the
patients have responded more rapidly to the medicines pre-
scribed and their cure has been considerably hastened.

With regard to specific diets for particular diseases you must
always bear in mind the patient you are treating, his circum-
stances of home or business life. He is an individual and his diet
must therefore be decided on the same principles.

THE HOMOEOPATHIC LAY PRACTITIONER

In this final lesson it is fitting that we draw your attention to
one or two Important points. Each student has his own reasons
for studying Homoeopathy. Many wish only to learn more


--- Page 139 ---
133

DRUG RELATIONSHIPS Lesson 12

m of medicine to help those about them towards
to be able to treat in emergency those acute
et all members ofa family at times, and toact
hat they are giving the right treatment until

an arrives. o
ly do not have an Homoeopathic
e many — are thrown on their

about this syste
better health;
ailments which bes
in the knowledge t 1e)
the Homoeopathic Physici
Those who unfortunate

Physician nearby — and there ar
own resources and feel compelled to make a-deeper study so

that they can with reasonable confidence treat ailments which
do not assume too grave a character.

On the other hand, there are some students who, in their firm
belief of Homoeopathic principles and in their desire to see
Homoeopathy spreading, will extend the range of their treat-
ments possibly building up a lay practice over a period of me.
To these students especially the following remarks are address-
ed.

Let us review briefly some of the considerations which must
be borne in mind. We believe that in this country, legally there
are no diseases which may not be treated by a lay practitioner,
but there are a number of diseases listed in the Pharmacy and
Medicines Act 1941, for which one must not claim cures. This
applies to both the written and the spoken word. One must,
therefore, never make a claim for ‘specified treatment’ or any
‘particular medicine’ in the treatment of these diseases.

The wording of the Act at the time of going to press, is we
believe as follows:

‘Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall] take
part in the publication of any advertisement referring to any.
article, or articles of any description, in terms which are cal-
culated to lead to the use of that article or articles of that des-
cription for the purpose of the treatment of human beings for
any of the following diseases, namely, Bright’s disease, cataract,
diabetes, epilepsy or fits, glaucoma, locomotor ataxia, paralysis
or tuberculosis:
risceatiat sup ea shall not apply to an advertise-
ofa i a a ee aymouays Oe cure ee TS body
Peat caves ane , oF by any person acting with the sanc-

Th ary of State or the }iinister. of Health.’

4he Act also contains a section regarding the advertisement

of articles ofa ipti r i rriag
n description for the procuri g i lage i
y ng of miscarriage in
women, and cancer. i


--- Page 140 ---
134 DRUG RELATIONSHIPS Lesson 12

Venereal Disease may only be treated when and where there
is no free treatment available through a local authority or
hospital. In view of the present health service it would appear
unlikely that there are many places in the British Isles so remote
as not to possess such facilities.

All Infectious Diseases must be reported to the local health
authorities. These include the following — Small-pox, cholera,
diphtheria, membranous croup, erysipelas, scarlatina or scarlet
fever. typhus, typhoid (enteric), relapsing. continued and puer-
peral fevers, tuberculosis, cerebro-spinal meningitis, anterior
polio-myelitis, and other diseases in certain localities.

Specific diagnosis of a disease should be avoided by a lay-
practitioner as inLaw a proof of ‘wrongful diagnosis’ might be
subsequently considered to be ‘negligence’ if the wrong treat-
ment has been persisted in. In any serious condition or where
any of the diseases listecl above seems to be indicated, it is
always as well to have a confirmatory diagnosis made by a
registered doctor, in fairness to both yourself and the patient.

We suggest that great care should be taken when dealing
with serious ailments and owing to the possibility ofa change in
the law it is advisable to consult a Solicitor when in doubt.

Remember at all times that in your behaviour and in your
treatment of a patient it is Homoeopathy that is being judged.
Any action or negligence on your part which brings discredit to
you, also brings discredit to this system of medicine, and that,
we are sure, vou would not wish. Dr. Roberts in his book The
Principles and Art of Cure by Homoeopathy states ‘When in doubt,
DON’T’. May we endorse this remark when the good name of
Homoeopathy may be at stake.

SUMMARY

In this our last lesson, it is fitting that we review briefly the
basic principles of Homoeopathy which it has been our endea-
vour to teach you. The principles are unchanging and it is our hope
that as a result of your studies you have so absorbed these basic
pinciples that it will be your wish never to deviate from them.
Let us then briefly summarise the teachings of Hahnemann in
order to be sure that they are firmly established in our minds:


--- Page 141 ---
DRUG RELATIONSHIPS Lesson 12 135

fi Homoeopathy isa system of medicine based on the principle
Similia Similibus Curentur — Let likes be treated by likes. In
order to be curative the remedy prescribed must be capable of
exciting similar symptoms in the body to those of which the
patient complains. .

There are kinds and degrees of similarity so that even though
the perfect similimum may not always be found, a near similar
mav nevertheless stimulate the patient towards cure.

The remedies used in Homoeopathic practice have been
thoroughly tested and their range of action established by being
proved on healthy persons. The Homoeopathic practitioner,
therefore, knows exactly what results to expect from the medi-
cine when he prescribes it according to Homoeopathic prin-
ciples.

The Homoeopathic Materia Medica is made up of the
records of drug provings, supplemented by histories of poison-
ings and information derived from successful treatment, i.e.
clinical evidence.

Case-taking is not only for the purpose of ascertaining a
diagnosis but also to elicit the symptoms of each individual
patient, both mental and physical, as they differ from the
normal.

Symptoms have degrees of value for the purpose of making a
prescription. General symptoms are of greater value than parti-
cular symptoms. Of the General symptoms those pertaining to
the Mind rank the highest.

The remedy is selected by careful comparison of the charac-
teristic totality of symptoms of the individual with that of drugs.
The drug which is most homoeopathic is that one which ts
capable of producing symptoms most similar to that of the con-
dition present.

The remedy finally selected for a patient must be the true
similimum or that which most nearly covers the totality of
symptoms. Its action should be carefully observed and no other
remedy given until the remedial effect is exhausted.

The dose should be repeated only when improvement ceases
and symptoms return to their original form. The interval be-
tween doses is governed by the severity of the case and whether
the condition is acute or chronic. The remedy should be
changed only when improvement ceases and/or symptoms

change.


--- Page 142 ---
136 DRUG RELATIONSHIPS Lesson 12

improvement is evidenced by an increased sense of comfort
and naturalness in the feelings of the patient. He feels better
himself though his pains may be aggravated.

Cure takes place from above downward; from within out-
ward; from an important organ to a less important organ;
symptoms disappear in the reverse order of their appearance,
ihe first to appear being the last to disappear. The return of old
symptoms in a chronic case may, therefore, be taken as a sign of
incipient cure.

In order to understand and appreciate the Homocopathic
system of medicine and the principles on which it operates, it is
essential to know something about life — what it is and how it
operates in animal and human bodies. Hahnemann postulated
itis the Vital Force that animates a living body and maintains'it
in health. An interruption of its activity results in disease be-
coming manifest, while a total suspension results in death. This
Vital or Life Force is dynamic in nature, possessing the power to
create, organise, build and maintain living animal and human
bodies in organic physical matter. Every process of life works
from seed to organism, from the centre to the circumference,
from within outwards. Homoeopathic remedies have a similar
action and are thus in conformity with this great natural law.

Chapters 3—7, 11, 16—21, 31—35 of Roberts’ The Principles
and Art of Cure by Homoeopathy should now be read and studied.

TEST PAPER No. 12

These questions should be answered only when the student
feels confident that the lesson has been mastered. There should
be no reference to books as this would defeat the object.

I. If a patient complained of feeling unwell! following an
accident, what is the first remedy you would think of for
him?

2. If a patient complained of catching many colds, which
went on to the chest, how would you deal with the case?

What questions would you ask and what medicines would
you prescribe?

4. Name five symptoms which point to Psora.


--- Page 143 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Some of the most useful and valuable books for continued study
and use are:

A COMPARISON OF THECHRONIC MIASMS by Phyllis
Speight

A DICTIONARY OF PRACTICAL MATERIA MEDICA
(3 volumes) by Dr. J.H. Clarke

A SONG OF SYMPTOMS by Patersimilias

CHRONIC DISEASE by Dr. S. Hahnemann

CLINICAL REPERTORY by Dr. J.H. Clarke
CONDENSED MATERIA MEDICA by Dr. C. Hering
HOMOEOPATHIC DRUG PICTURES by Dr. M.L. Tyler
HOW TO USE THE REPERTORY by Dr. G.I. Bidwell
LEADERS IN HOMOEOPATHIC THERAPEUTICS by
Dr. E.B. Nash

LECTURES ON HOMOEOPATHIC MATERIA MEDICA
by Dr. J.T. Kent

LECTURES ON HOMOEOPATHIC PHILOSOPHY by ,
Dr. J.T. Kent

MATERIA MEDICA OF THE NOSODES by Dr. Allen
MATERIA MEDICA PURA by Dr. S. Hahnemann
REPERTORY by Dr. J.T. Kent

THE CHRONIC MIASMS by Dr. Allen

THE ORGANON by Dr. S. Hahnemann

VACCINOSIS by Dr. J.C. Burnett

The small books by Dr. J. Compton Burnett are well worth
serious study. they include ENLARGED TONSILS.

137


--- Page 144 ---
138 BIBLIOGRAPHY

FISTULA, GOLD, GOUT. LIVER, NATRUM
MURIATICUM and TUMOURS.

Kent’s REPERTORY is the best but it needs skill in handling.
Bidwell’s work, mentioned above, is helpful in this respect.
You are reminded that although you have read many extracts

from THE ORGANON a complete study should be made of
this work together with THE MATERIA MEDICA PURA

and CHRONIC DISEASES by Hahnemann.


--- Page 145 ---
SPECIMEN ANSWERS

Test Paper No. 1

I,
Z

The Law of Similars — Simila Similibus Curentur.
Because pathological changes are the end product of

disease. If the patient as a whole is treated he will, in time,
lose all symptoms of sickness, providing he is curable.

Because the most similar remedy will give the healing
processes of the body the boost they need to cure the
patient.

Test Paper No. 2

1,

nN

Acquired and inherited. Acquired diseases from direct
contamination with epidemic and endemic diseases.
Inherited diseases are those which develop according to
the idiocyncrasies of the patient.

In order that we can be sure any symptoms exhibited after
taking the substance to be proved come from the
symptoms of sickness of the prover and are not symptoms
of the prover.

Terror: unreasonable fears; restlessness; suddenness of the
appearance of symptoms. -All symptoms worse cold, dry

winds.

Test Paper No.

li

From re downwards (i.e. from shoulder to wrist).
From within outward (this happens when there is a skin
eruption, an attack of diarrhoea, vomiting etc). Symptoms
disappear in the reverse order of their appearance (the last
symptom is the first to go and the first is the last one to
disappear).

The higher potencies should be given in chronic disease
providing the vitality of the patient is strong enoughand
there is little or no organic change.

139


--- Page 146 ---
SPECIMEN ANSWERS TO THE TEST PAPERS

Redness — heat, intense burning.

Arnica should always be used after an accident as there is
usually bruising of the soft parts and it 1s important to
remove the shock which always follows. Arnica should
always be used when a patient cannot sleep because of
overtiredness caused by hard physical work.

Hypericum should be given when a person suflers great
pain after shutting his fingers in a door. The nerve endings
suffer bruising and sometimes damage and hypericum
deals with this and removes the pain.

Test Paper No. 4

3,

Acute conditions do not, as a rule, last very long. They
attack, get worse and then there is always a tendency
towards recovery. Chronic conditions, on the other hand,
progress, sometimes yery slowly, and there is no tendency
towards recovery. The patient's vital force cannot control
these diseases and they can be cured only by proper treat-
ment.

Psora, Syphilis and Gonorrhoea (Sycosis).

Deep acting remedies that could affect the whole of man’s
economy. Remedies which act from the centre to the
circumference.

Restlessness. Intense burning but pains better by heat.
Great and sudden prostration. Intense thirst but drinks
little ata time.

Test Paper No. 5

The deep-acting psoric remedies working from the centre
to the circumference would in all probability bring out an
¢ruption on the skin.

‘\ skin eruption is the manifestation of something wrong in

the economy and ointments must never be applied as this

would only push back into the system the poisons which

"are trying to come out. Headaches, flatulence, slight

diarrhoea may also come to the surface — they should not

_ be treated as they will dise ppear in a few days — they are
- but aggravations from the medicines.


--- Page 147 ---
SPECIMEN ANSWERS TO THE TES1 PAPERS 141

a

Test
l.

no

4.
Test
t.

2.

The classical child needing sulphur looks as though he
needs a wash although he has just had one! His hair is lank
and untidy; his clothes are dirty and often torn and he
doesn’t seem to notice. His eyes, ears and lips often look
very red. This child will come into the room and collapse
into a chair, especially mid-morning, and demand food.
He often has odd spots. herpes. or an eruption somewhere
on the skin.

Paper No. 6

A nightly aggravation of all complaints. Destruction of
tissue. Ulcerations including varicose ulcers. Sudden and
severe diarrhoeas. Mentality slow, stubborn, sullen,
stupid, suspicious. Menstrual troubles relieved by the out-
break of an ulcer. Destruction of nasa! bones.

Overgrowth of tissue — warts. Rheumatism and arthritis.
Chronic catarrh. Thickening of skin and nails. Diseases of
the sexual] organs.

Repeated vaccination:

Vaccinal poisons. Tea.

Paper No.7
Psora combined with syphilis.

When a patient is suffering from all these symptoms the
case must be taken and looked at very carefully in order
that the active miasm at that time may be treated. As
treatment progresses another miasm will show up and
then that will have to be treated and so on.

A nosode is a medicine made from morbid or disease
products. A nosode may be used when the indicated
remedy brings no good results. Often there is a barrier
which the nosode will rerr-ove and then the constitutional
remedy will do its job. Also, a nosode may be given when
there is a family history of one of the chronic diseases, or
when symptoms in the patient suggest a certain disease.

There is very great sensitlvizy -wentally but especially

physically, to a draught of arr, to leas! touch and to pain
which sometimes becomes intolerable and causes the


--- Page 148 ---
142

Test
1.

Test
l.

~ SPECIMEN ANSWERS TO THETEST PAPERS

patient to faint. Great tendency to suppurations. The
slightest scratch or injury suppurates.

Paper No. 8
We should learn all we can from the patient as they come

in. A mental note should be made of things like their
handshake, how they walk. how they are dressed and how
they sit down. A great deal can be learned in this way
before the actual serious talking begins.

A young man asks for help for a hard and painful cough

He said that it started after he had walked home from work
ina very cold wind. [t was worse coming into a warm room
from outside and he always held his chest as this seemed to
ease the pain. He liked to be out in the.open air. He hada
good appetite but always had a lot of wind after meals
which relieved a full feeling. He was thristy and drank a lot
as his mouth was always drv. He was very irritable. Also
very anxious but when he went out fora walk he felt better.
This is a good picture of Bryonia.

Avoid asking questions where the answer can be ‘yes’ or
‘no’. Avoid trying to fit a remedy into the symptoms of the
patient before the case has been taken fully. Avoid being
biased and keep an open mind until all the pros and cons
have been weighed up and the remedy picture emerges.

Worse all movement. Worse dry cold winds. Better
pressure. Dryness of mucous membranes.

Pape No. 9

General symptoms are wosc that relate to the patient as a
whole, when he says, ‘I feel...

Mental symptoms are those which affect the will, under-
Standing and memorn. When strongly marked they often
supply the key to the prescription. a
Particular symptoms are those which are applicable to

Some part of the patient but are of least value when
assessing the case.

[t is wrong to pre§cribe on particular symptoms as this
would be treating an effect and not getting to the cause of
the trouble which is sealed in the patient's economy. — -


--- Page 149 ---
SPECIMEN ANSWERS TO THE TEST PAPERS 143

3. Lycopodium China and Carbo veg., are the three great
‘wind’ remedies.

4. Complaints are worse fram 4 to 8 p.m.
Complaints are right-sided or move from right to left.
Patient is hungry but a little food soon causes a feeling of
fullness and distension.
Better warm drinks. Worse cold food and drink.

Test Paper No. 10
Mrs X aged 46 years.
Headaches constant:
Worse lying.
Occipital pain, sense of pressure.
Dizziness and dimness of vision.
Difficult breathing when ascending stairs.
When leaning back.
Sighs much recently.
Sleep good at night, but tired in the morning.
Wants to sleep all the time:
worse after eating.
Hungry, but easily satisfied.
No thirst
Flatus considerable.
Very restless.
Sadness from music.
Niemory poor.
Speech stuttering recently.
Concentration difficult.
Imagines she sees things running across the floor, mice etc.
Thinks of nothing but death.
Homesick, whenever away visiting.
Irritable and cross.
Sensitive io noise.
Desires company.
Better in open air; must have it.
Very sensitive to tight collars, and tight clothing anywhere.
Urination frequent; copious,
worse when on her feet.
Menstrual period irregular; delayed, at times two or three

months.


--- Page 150 ---
144 SPECIMEN ANSWERS TO THE TEST PAPERS

Flow copious 3 or 4 days.
Discharge very dark, strong odour, excoriating, during latter
part of period.

‘The most important symptoms is ‘Imagines she sees things
running across the floor, mice etc.’ and so we take the rubric
Delusions i in the repertory and use the remedies that appear in
black type and italic only.

Another exercise is to repertorize this case which worked out
to Lycopodium and this cured.

Test Paper No. 11
I. Inacute disorders.

2. a. That the remedy is correct but the vital organs have
been affected which slows up improvement, ora cure is not
possible.

b. The remedy is correct.

3. When the patient is improving NEVER repeat until
improvement comes to a halt and the same symptoms
start to return. If new.symptoms arise then another
remedy must be found to match them.

4. A patient needing Silica is usually rather timid, and a
person who gets het up anticipating events.
He feels the cold very much, especially his head which he
likes wrapped up even in bed.
He is very susceptible to draughts and takes cold very
easily.
Every small wound suppurates.

Test Paper No. 12 .
1. Arnica, because he would be suffering from shock.

2. A full case history:would have to be taken with special
interest as to whether there was any history of T.B. or
chest troubles in his immediate family, parents, grand
parents, brothers or sisters.

His constitutional remedy must be given but Bacillinum
should also be thought ofas this is the nosode which has an

affinity with the lungs. It often does excellent work in
strengthening them.


--- Page 151 ---
SPECIMEN ANSWERS TO THE TEST PAPERS 145

oh.

You can only recognise the miasms from the symptoms of
the patient and the uppermost will be recognised — again
by symptoms. You may have a case where the sycotic
miasm is uppermost, for instance the woman who has
suffered a great deal from uterine troubles, has sevecal
warts and a fishy taste in her mouth, After treatment with
sycotic remedies this may change and Psora may come to"
the top and she may then have a great itching of the skin,
with hunger pains at night or mid-morning, with dry hot
hands and feet — the soles burn.

Then a psoric remedy must be chosen.

After some time there will be another change and the
Syphilitic miasm may come up or the Sycotic one may
return. We can only remove the miasms ‘in layers’ rather
like peeling an onion, It is a mistake to think that when a
miasm has been treated and the symptoms change that it
has been stamped out,

a. A sinking feeling mid-morning.

b. Feels tired — flops into a chair or props himself against
a wall.

c. Skin looks dirty often with an itching eruption.

d. Emotional disturbances make patient ill.

e. Hair lank, greasy, lustreless.



--- Page 152 ---


--- Page 153 ---
THE CALCUTTA HOMOEOPATHIC
MEDICAL COLLEGE LIBRARY

CALCUTTA

Accession No. tale oe. sos Coll nolo 532°!

This book should be returned on or before 15 days from
the date of issue. A fine of 10 paise per day will be
imposed for delay in returning the book.

Issue Date Borrower's No.

issue Date | Borrower's No.

——


--- Page 154 ---
Other recommended books. . .

——

DICTIONARY
OF

PRACTICAL
MATERIA
MEDICA

D: “‘chnH. Clarke

‘

A
CLINICAL
REPERTORY
TO
THE
DICTIONARY
OF - |.

AA DICA

Ss ee H. Clarke

abe on A
COMPARISON
OF.

THE

~ ‘CHRONIC

MIASMS
Phytlis Speight

Acclaimed as Dr Clarke’s greatest
achievement, this monumental treatise of
2,614 pages in three volumes contains the
best homoeopathic teaching by such masters
of the science as Doctors Hahnemann, Allen,
Cooper, Hering, Nash and Skinner.

Dr Clarke adopts the Hahnemann method in
tabulating information relating to every
important remedy. Thus symptoms are listed
under twenty seven headings. prefaced by

a ‘Clinical’ section showing t. disorders for
which each remedy is u ~ . a”! tollowed by
‘Characteristics’ indicating U.e .eading
individual features of eact. i. medy. An
additional ‘Relations’ section gives remedies
having some similar symptoms, enabling the
practitine. ° consider them before deciding

upon the prescription. 200.00

Essential for quick and accurate selection of
remedies, this book provides the necessary
information in a. admirably concise manner,
making it an indispensable supplement to —
Dr. Clarke’s famousDictionary. Remedies for
many disorders are arranged alphabetically
from ibdomen to Zygoma. Other contents
include: Causation, Temperaments,
Dispositions, Constitutions and States,
Clinical Relationship, etc. 25:00 |

Seven-eights of all prevalent chronic maladies
are ascribed by Hahnemann to Psofa, whilst
the remaining eighth originates in Syphilis
and Sycosis, or a complex combination of
,ihese two miasnfatic chronic diseases—or of
“all three. This is the only work giving a side-
by-side comparison of the Chronic Miasms,
essential in successful homoeopathic
ptescribing. ~ __ 10.00

HANJEET & CO.

1920, CHUNA MANDI, StrEcT 10TH, *,
Post Box 5752, ; .
New De.ui-110 055, ‘z

ee
