
--- Page 1 ---
Homoeopathy
and Mind

(Materia Medica)



--- Page 2 ---


--- Page 3 ---
Homoeopathy & Mind

(Materia Medica)

Dr. Amarjit Singh Mann
DHMS (Silver Medalist)
Chief Editor, Homoeopathic Community Journal,

Dr. Bhupinder Singh

DHMS (Hon’s)

Ex-Chairman,

Council of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Punjab

Dr. Neelam Avtar Singh
DHMS, D.Sc., LL.B.
Managing Editor, Homoeopathic Community Journal

be
Indian Books & Periodicals Publishers
New Delhi-110 005 (India)


--- Page 4 ---
‘Note from the Publisher: Any information given in this book is
not intended to be taken as a replacement for medical advice. Any
‘person with a condition requiring medical attention should consult a
qualified homoeopathic practitioner or therapeutist.

First Edition: 2003

First Reprint Edition: November 2005
Second Reprint Edition: November 2007
Third Reprint Edition: November 2011

© Copyright-reserved with the Authors.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior
permission of the Publisher. ;

/
Price: $120.00

Published by:

Mayur Jain

Indian Books & Periodicals Publishers
Block-5/62, Dev Nagar, Pyare Lal Road,
Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110 005 (India)

Phone no.: 011 25725444, Fax no.: 011 25766699
E-mail: ibps.homoeopathy®gmail.com

Website: www.ibpsbook.tom

Overseas Distributor:

Indian Books & Periodicals Syndicate
Block-5/62, Dev Nagar, Pyare Lal Road,
Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110 005 (INDIA)

ISBN: 81-7467-173-0

Book Code No.: [B1420


--- Page 5 ---
Respected Dr.7t.t. Sehgal

who revitalized the art of giving
medicines on the basis of deep
understanding of the patient's mind
and gave a new direction.


--- Page 6 ---
This book is an attempt to show
how we are following the path shown by
Dr M.L.Sehgal
(founder of Sehgal's School of Revolutionized Homoeopathy )
and © my
Dr. Sanjay Sehgal and Dr. Yogesh Sehgal. .
This book is dedicated to
them.’
To spread this art of prescription,
they delivered lectures in India
(Delhi, Sangrur, Patiala, Ludhiana, Mumbai Aligarh)
and abroad (London, Germany, Switzerland,. Czech
« Republic, Slovak Republic). a
They are honoured by British Registrar of Complementary
Practitioners (Homoeopathic Division) U.K.
A ae graph was printed on the title cover of the
Homoeop ound 0 of Registered, Society of HomBeopaths (ux)


--- Page 7 ---
FOREWORD

| have a lifetong tendency to develop a sore throat. Inspite
of gargling and general “Desi” medicine, the throat once
caught, gets worse, my voice grows hoarse and some time
goes dead completely. When it recovers, cough sets in and
| have to ultimately take recourse to allopathic antibiotics.
This cycle lasts for three weeks, sometimes a month and a
half. Even the residual problem takes 15 days by then, the
next cycle is ready to start. Thus it was that once | .-
approached a homoeopathic doctor with a bad throat a few
days before an important seminar. | told him that the seminar
was extremely important to me & | dreaded another 25 days
cycle of sore throat, dead voice and bad cough. In short, |
was ‘desperate’. Even as he fiddled inside his medicine
chest, | started filling him in about which medicine had suited
me in the past and which one ! had already taken this time.
He held up his hand, “It does not matter, you have given a
complete clue to your malady with the word "desperate".
He selected an exact malady and sure enough, Just one
dose cured me completely.

It is amazing that a correct homoeopathic diagnosis often
depends, not upon what the problem is, but upon how you
express it, in fact the exact words that you use. In this way
homeopathy has a direct link with not only with the body but


--- Page 8 ---
also with the mind. That is why the study of homeopathy is
a fascinating art because it travels into uncharted territory.

1 also had on occasion once to listen to a lecture by
Dr. Khan from Calcutta. As a part of lecture he introduced
certain hypothetical Gases and asked the audience,
containing mostly homeopaths, which medicine they would
recommend. Amid shouts of “Phosphorus, Pyrogenium,
Opium” and other such deadly material, he coolly gave his
answer, and the reason for it. It was again a fascinating
analysis.

My relationship with this entire exercise is only to wish that
! could do it too but for those who can actually work it out,
and practice accordingly, | am sure it would be extremely
satisfying. So, here's wishing intelligent homeopathic
‘practitioners, the very best of luck in this endeavour. | am
told the Late Dr. M.L. Sehgal to whom this book is dedicated
was something close to an expert in this field. His sons
_ Sanjay and Yogesh have also taken up this work
enthusiastically and are teaching all over the world on the
subject. | wish the writers of this book Dr. A.S. Mann,
Dr. Avtar Singh, Di. Bhupinder Singh and Dr. Neelam and
organizers of this entire movement the very best of success
in the service of humanity and patient cure.
K.K.Bhatnagar
IAS


--- Page 9 ---
A JOURNEY THAT CONTINUED...

The journey of homoeopathy began with Late Dr. D.S.Virk
(Patiala). Then Dr. Avtar Singh (Patiala) joined and a few steps
ahead Dr. Neelam Avtar Singh also accompanied ‘us. On our
way we also met Dr. Ravinder Singh (Dhuri) and Dr. Bhupinder
Singh (Gidderbaha). We began with celebrating Hahnemann Day
and organizing free medical camps. In Nov. 1992, a seminar
was organized with Dr. M.L. Sehgal at Chandigarh and a new
light was thrown on the medicine like Belladonna and Opium.
When we applied these medicines in our dispensary, the results
were astonishing. First educative seminar on Dr. M.L.Sehgal was
organized at Sangrur in Punjab in Feb. 1993. The ,series of
seminars followed and almost 10 years have passed and there
has been no looking back since then.

People like Dr. Rama Kant, Dr. K.C.Batish, Dr. R.R.Kochar,
Dr. S.S. Vithal, Dr.Avtar Aneta, Dr.Surmeet Mavi, Dr.Sudesh
Kumar, Dr. Balvinder Singh, Dr. Rakesh Kapoor, Dr. Kuldeep
Singh, Dr. Paul Ghambir, Dr. Kamaldeep Singh Thind, Dr. Ashok
Duggal, Dr. (Er.) R.S. Saini, Dr. B.B. Mittal, Dr. Navin Singla,
Dr. S.P. Singla, Dr. H.S. Matharu, Dr. Manpreet Mann, Dr. Gurmit
Gill, Dr. Rajinder Girdhar, Dr. Tarsem Kumar, Dr. Vinod Singla,
Dr. J.S. Somal, Dr. Labh Singh Lit, Dr. Yashpal, Dr. P.S.Sodhi
also joined and it became a ‘Karvan'. These doctors and many
more, whose names could not be written here, started working
on the basic principle of homoeopathy ' i.e. Single dose of single
medicine at one time’ and it became a movement which is a real
tribute to Dr. Hahnemann. Direction to this movement was given
by the two sons of Dr. M.L.Sehgal (Dr. Sanjay Sehgal and Dr.
Yogesh Sehgal) who delivered several lectures in 'Homoeopathic
Study Circle’ at Sangrur. We owe great thanks to the Thind family
of Patiala and 'Medicynth Pvt. Ltd.' (Beck and Koll) whose
cooperation is still with us for our journal 'Homoeopathic
Community Journal’.


--- Page 10 ---
When we delivered lectures on Sehgal theory in Bhatinda,
-Abohar, Taran Tarn, there arose a demand that a book should be
published in Punjabi regarding what the patient says, what are
his mind rubrics and how to give medicine on the basis of mind
rubrics. A book in Punjabi was published, after which there has
been a constant demand raised by the doctors as well as the
students to translate it in Hindi. A book in Hindi was also published
on the same pattern but again a demand was raised to translate
it in English by doctors of southern states and of foreign, so we
are now publishing it in English. We are thankful to
Miss Monisha Chauhan who helped in translating the book into
English. Whatever we have experimented and proved in the last
10 years, has been reproduced (written) word to word. Nothing
has been added on our own. Yes, Dr. Neelam has given her very
precious time and worked untiringly in getting the book published.
We are treating 100% cases on mind rubrics from the last
ten years. Physical symptoms are not required. Dr. Sehgal or his
sons (or we) have never claimed that this is the only way to select
the similimum. But we definitely say that this is an easier way.
Now it is upto you to decide whether to select the medicine on
the basis of mind symptoms alone (to follow this easier way),
physical symptoms alone or on both. We don't claim that only
our system is the best.

We might have made several mistakes while writing this
book. Our main focus is, to study the mind symptoms and to
recommend medicine on the basis of that.

|, on behalf the whole group,-is thankful to you for the useful
suggestions. | hope that we will be always surrounded with the
same warmth and affection. You may find few things strange .
and wonderful but accept them with an open mind and try: to
apply them.
In hope of more cooperation

Dr. Amarjit Singh Mann.


--- Page 11 ---
BASIC PRINCIPLES
ABOUT SEHGAL TECHNIQUE

New technique is based on mind symptoms. It is generally
said by the doctors that nobody gives the mind symptoms directly.
But according to this technique, which is the contribution of Dr.
M.L. Sehgal, whatever the patient tells you when he comes to
you, is to be converted into rubrics, and medicine is selected on
the basis of that. This is a very easy technique. In a very short
span, a homoeopathic doctor selects the medicine. It is the .
contribution of Dr. Sehgal that those rubrics which were lying
dead in the mind section of our repertory, have been revitalised. —
When after this discovery of Dr. Sehgal, 'Materia Medica Mind’
was formed, we came to know that there are 681 mind rubrics
for a short acting medicine like Belladonna. In 80% cases, the
medicine has to be selected on the basis of one, two or three
mind rubrics. There is no need to take a long case history. Only
Present Predominant Persistent (PPP) mind rubrics are to be
taken. There is no need to be surprised if you are told that these
are neither rare nor peculiar symptoms rather they are usual and
very common-symptoms. This thing, regarding this technique,
has to be understood very clearly and has to be applied with full
faith and an open mind. If you can prove in your practice that this
technique is wrong, you discontinue its use. But so far it has
never happened, that someone has applied this technique without
any prejudice and has never got success. Rather it has been
heard that a single dose has cured an old complicated case and
that became a follower of Dr. Sehgal.

l, myself, when attended a seminar in Nov. 1992 in
Chandigarh was suspicious and this idea came to my mind that
the whole concept was wrong. | sent a slip to the secretary that
this idea did not appeal me. But | applied it with an open mind.
The kind of success | got in my dispensary with Belladonna and


--- Page 12 ---
Opium was an eye opener. This happened with others too.
Whenever someone applied there technique either after listening
the lecture or after reading the journal of our association, got
success, and he became a follower of this path.

Few examples of what the patient says and hand to convert
It into mind rubric :

1.

“Dr. Sahib, give me some medicine which gives instant relief.
Generally homoeopathy works very slowly that is why | don't -
go for it.”

Carried desire to be fast

"Dr. Sahib, few days back someone told me about you but
| did not bother. Today | was just crossing, when | decided
to come to you.”

Frivolous and Unconsciousness interrupted by screaming

"Dr. Sahib, Ihave been taking your medicine for the last so
many days (months) but | have got no relief.”
Fear extravagance of

"Dr. Sahib | have been suffering for the last so many days
(months) but did not bother. But now | can't bear it more.”
Previously indifference to suffering and Fear extravagance, of

“Dr. Sahib, please do something, please save me." Or the
patient at home is crying for the doctor, "Save me please,
call the doctor.”

Delirium, crying for help.

"| won't go for any test. Give me medicine without those
tests, | am afraid of it." .
Light shuns


--- Page 13 ---
7. "Dr. Sahib, |-am ready to go for tests, X-ray, Ultra eauts if
it could help in the diagnosis."
Light desire for

8. The child clings to someone, sleeps with him, wants to be
in his lap and cries if the person goes to the bazaar leaving
him behind.

Clinging to persons or furniture etc.

9. The child is quiet afraid of injections.
Fear injured of being

10. “Dr. Sahib | don't interfere in my children's affair | don't say ©
them anything, whether they make it 5 or50, make it or
mar it, whether they gain or lose, it is their's.”

‘ Recognises reality and accepts it
Just have a look that these are common utterances

(common versions) of the patient, which we had always ignored

previously. These are already lying as the rubrics in mind sections.

The only need is to apply them.

FEW BASIC PRINCIPLES:

(Remove prejudices)

- 4.. There is no need to give importance to the grades of the
medicines and stop adding the numbers according to grades.
2. There is no need to make any distinction between short or
long acting medicines.

3. Only Present Predominant Persistent (PPP) has to
observed.

4. Noneed of miasmatic consideration, individualise the case
follow the patient.


--- Page 14 ---
FEW IMPORTANT POINTS :

1.

The patient should mentally feel relieved after first dose.
There must be a change from laziness to activeness, from
lack of desire to work to desire for work, change in hunger,
sleep, feeling of happiness from within. Instead of going
down, the patient should go up daily. Even the hint of his
mental relief either for one hour or for one day is a sufficient
indication of his improvement.

The patient can feel physical suffering after feeling mentally
relieved. It can stay there for 3, 5, 7 or 9 days (odd days)
and the expulsion may come out from any outlet. e.g. cold,
loose motions, fever, vomiting, leucorrhoea or his anger
may aggravate. It is not necessary that expulsions should
come out in‘every case. It may occur in few cases and the
patient recovers with placebo. Earlier whenever this toxic
matter found its outlet, we used to suppress it by giving
some other medicine but then has not to be stopped. This
can happen not only once but several times. But next time
there will be a decrease either in the flow or quantity or
duration of expulsion andthe patient will recover with
placebo. If the disease sVeneeiene® increase to 100% again —
then the medicine will have @@g@6'given again. If we change
the potency, we get better results.

We begin all cases with 30 potency and if need be, we go
to 6 potency instead of going to higher potencies. (After
that Dr. M.L. Sehgal in his experiment has seen that in 3X
if medicine is dissolved in water, it gives better results).
There is no need to be surprised. We go to lower potency
after giving higher one. Look at the Footnote 127, Chronic
Diseases Part | by Dr. Hahnemann, who used to begin his

_ Vi


--- Page 15 ---
cases from 30 potency, order then to 24, 18, 12, 6 i.e.
descending potency. This wagtold by ae Dr.
H.L.Chitkara for the first time & a seminar held in Sangrur
in 1995. We applied it and got‘Wonderful results.

4. Dr. ML. Sehgal used to say that the case history of thé
patient should be written in the moth tongue. There is no
need to hesitate in writing in mother tongue. Don't make
the rubric directly. After writing the whole case,-see present :
predominant and persistent (PPP) rubrics Write the’
problems of patient in one, two, three order so that you can
ask how much hi has improved in one or the Aone problem.

FOR BEING A SUCCESSFUL PRACTITIONER:

i) He should be familiar with the rubrics: go through mind -
section again and again, read it thoroughly. You should know

every rubric.

ii) | You should know the dictionary meaning of the rubric. Write

down its meaning on the book. Don't” hesitate in making the

repertory-black. Get anew additional copy. Y

ii) You shoufd know language of the patient, what Weide the

patient is speaking. (Look ROH series Part 4 by Dr. Sehgal) ,

Always remember the words of Dr. ae "Mind is the
key to man".

Always remember the words of Dr.Kent “It is the man who is
sick- Will and understanding make the man.”

Dr. M.L. Sehgal (or We) never say that peculiar, rare or
physical symptoms do not help in the selection of medicine. But
Dr. Sehgal says that if you become an expert in making rubrics
from the general talk of the patient, it is an easier way and. you

do not need to go into the deep details.
vii

ee


--- Page 16 ---
HOW TO TAKE CASE ON MIND TECHNIQUE

We have seen that doctors find difficulties in taking up the
case. They regularly ask questions about case taking. We are giving
here a simple format of general questions which we usually ask to
the patients in our daily routine. This format can be helpful to you.

Q: What is the problem?

A is my problem.

Q: Form how long?

A: many days.

Q: Have you taken any medicine?
A: No, | have not.

Q: Why didn't you take medicine?
A 1): Laughingly, no particular reason.
) Laughing, speaking when

Il) — Frivolous

A 2): Without laughing, no particular reason.
Il) Frivolous

A 3): Without laughing, no particular reason, | didn't bother though.
| knew of the sickness.
IV) _ Indifference, suffering to.

A 4): | took some home made remedy or took medicine on my own.
Today | realized that without medicine it would be difficult to go on,
so | have come to you.

V) Delusion, help calling for (only Platina)

Q: Why have you come to take medicine today?

A 1): | had come to the city so | decided to come here.

Or

Today my wife /nusband/ mother asked me to take some medicine,

viii


--- Page 17 ---
so | have come.
VI) Frivolous.

A 2): Today/ tonight the problem increased so | have come to take
medicine.
Vil) Fear asia as of

Q: | Why did you think of taking homoeopathic medicine ?

A: My friend told me that he had recovered, so | thought that ,
even | would get cured.

Vill) Superstitious

IX) Naive
X) Credulous 4
1, Ul, Vill, IX, X

_ Medicine : Belladonna

Q: When did your friend tell you?
A1): He told me only yesterday/ today, and | have come.
Xl) Carried desire to be fast. ;
1, VIII, LX, X, XI
Medicine : Belladonna

A 2) : "He told me few days back | thought when | would go to the
Bazaar, | would take the medicine", said laughingly.

X\t) Frivolous
XItl) Laughing Speaking when ;
VIII, 1X, X, XU, XI z

Medicine : Belladonna
Q: Why didn't you take homoeopathy earlier?
A: — | thought that it works very slowly, whereas allopathy works
very fast.
XIV) Carried desire to be fast.
1, Vi, IX, X, XIV
Medicine : Belladonna

Q: Why have you come to take homoeopathic medicine today?

ix


--- Page 18 ---
A: You cured me, of my previous i!lness, so it was obvious that
| should come to you. (He has experience of homoeopathy on
himself)

1)  Objectiv2 reasona™'e

The patient is sure of his recovery. If you ask him whether he is
hopeful of his recovery, he will answer in the affirmative.

2) Hopeful

Medicine : Natrum Mur.

Q:  Howis your nature? How much angry do you feel?
eA: | feel very angry.

Q: What do you do in anger?
A: 1) 1 throw things away or hit the things in anger.
a) Anger throws things away. ,
b) Throws things, person at, who offended
Medicine : Staphysagria
2) | become very voluble in anger, | even hit the children.

Q: Do you regret later on or not?
A: Yes, | do regret.

Q: After how much time (after five or ten minutes or after around
half an hour later)?

A 1): | repent immediately after five or ten minutes.

1) Anger alternating with repentance quick.

A 2): | repent later, after some time, may be half an hour or even
later after thinking.
11) Introspection (means late repentance)

Q: Do you like watching T.V., or listening to songs on tape
recorder / deck/ stereo and how much do you like?

A 3): | am very fond of watching T.V. and listening to songs. |
remember them and can even sing on hearing the tunes.

a) Music amel.


--- Page 19 ---
b) Cheerful music from .
c) Memory active music for.
d) — Singing involuntarily joins singing on hearing a little note sung.

I+a, b, c, d
Medicine : Crocus Sativa
tl+a

Medicine : Natrum Mur.

A 4): | get very restless while watching T.V. or listening to the songs
on tape recorder / deck/ stereo. | get irritated. | ask them to stop it.
e) Amusement averse to
f) Music aggravates
f-l) palpitation on listening to music.
I+e, f, f-l
Medicine : Sulphur
lite, f
Medicine : ignatia

A §): | don't get angry at all, | keep quiet and bear it. | never defy, |
never say anything.

g) Mildness.

h) Yielding disposition.

Q: Why do you remain quiet?

A 1): What is the use of it? What comes out of quarrels? It only
makes the matters worse. It is better to be quiet.

(i) | Recognizes reality and accepts it '
Medicine : Cocculus Indicus

A 2): Dr. Sahib, | am helpless. | am timid or | quarrel with the family
members but | have very good relations out side.
g,h+
i) Helplessness feeling of
ii) | Cowardice
iii) Quarrel aversion to
iv) Estranged family from his, being kind with strangers but not

xi,


--- Page 20 ---
with his entourage and his family.
Medicine : Lycopodium

A 3): l don't have the courage to say so. | can't give my Ee, I
get very angry but am unable to show it.

~ ie
i) Heilplessness feeling of
ii) | Cowardice, opinion, without courage to express her own
Medicine : Petroleum

A 4): | am unable to express my anger, | start crying. | am already
all alone, then they will ignore me completely. Even now they don't
love me. If some body consoles me/ loves me/ or shows sympathy,
| like it, but who has got the time.
g, h+
i) Weeping telling, sickness: when telling of her
ii) | Weeping answering a question at (only Puls)
iii) | Delusion alone she is
iv) Delusion neglected she is
v) Fear neglected of being
vi) Weeping consolation amel.
vii) Carried and caressed desire to be
Medicine : Pulsatilla

Q: What do you do when you are ill 7

A 1): | want to be in my bed quietly. | don't complain much.
i) Bed remain in desire to |
ii) Indifference complain does not

Medicine : Hyoscyamus

A 2): | want to remain in my bed, and | complain a lot.
i) Bed remain in desire to
ii) Lamenting sickness about his
Medicine : Argentum Nitricum —
A-3 | don't have the strength to get up. | want stillness all around.
There should be absolutely no noise and no one should disturb me


--- Page 21 ---
(Stillness of surrounding).

i) Torpor

ii) Quiet wants to be ,
iii) Disturbed averse to being
iv) Irritability spoken to when
Medicine : Gelsemium

A 4): No one should disturb me when | am sick,-even | don't allow
to touch my bed. But if'some one talks about. business, | will'get up
and say, "Let us discuss."

i) Disturbed averse to being .

ii) Quiet wants to be

iii) Fear starving of

iv) Fear poverty of

v) Business talks of

Medicine : Bryonia

(Note: In Gelsemium, III,IV,V rubrics are not present).

A-5 He doesn't want.to be disturbed, avoids seeing: people and
prefers to lie down with closed eyes. He is indifferent'to every one
around.

i) Company averse to, avoids the sight of people, lies with eyes
closed. :

ii) Indifferent to loved one.

Medicine : Sepia

In this way we keep on.asking.questions until we' reach-at.a
medicine and whole Materia Medica can be completed in this
way. There is no end of questions. Various questions regarding
hope or despair of recovery, avarice or'squandering, company
desire or company averse to, fears and-anxieties of various
kinds, memory or forgetfulness and many many more.things
can be helpful for reaching at the similimum.



--- Page 22 ---
HOW TO APPLY MIND TECHNIQUE IN CHILDREN

It is very easy to see mind rubrics in children. Many questions regarding
the behaviour, nature, the condition during illness can be asked. Few of
the examples are given below:

Q:

Q:

Does he throw the things away in anger?
(Anger throws things away)

Does he break the toys?
(Break things desire to, Destructiveness)

Does he claw the other's face ? ~
(Striking, boy clawing father's face)

Does he pull other's hair?
(Pull hair of other's)

Does he pull his own hair?

(Pulls hair his own)

Does he keep his books, clothes neat and clean and in order?
(Fastidious)

Is he afraid of injections?

(Fear ah of being )

i]
Does he run away from the injections and doesn't allow the doctor
to use even his stethoscope as he is_afraid that the doctor might
give him injection.
(Fear injured of being and fear betrayed of being )

{s hé'afraid‘of darkness? « ,

’ (Fear, dark of) § ,

“dst he afraid of ghosts at night?

(Fear ghosts, night)

is he scared of going into the room?
(Fear, room on entering)

Is he scared of robbers /thieves?
(Fear robbers of, delusion thieves, sees)

xiv


--- Page 23 ---
Does he strike his head on the wall?
(Striking himself, knocking head against wall)

Does he strike in anger?
(Rage, striking with)

Is he dominating?
(Dictatorial)

Is he estranged from the family and is kind with the strangers?
(Estranged, family from his, being kind with strangers but
not with entourage and his family)

Is he loving and affectionate ?
(Affectionate, returns affection)

Is he timid from inside but always talks of bravery, and
runs away when the danger comes?
(Affectation)

Does the child like being caressed to?
(Carried and caressed desire to be)

Does the child become quiet when carried in the lap and
rocked? ,
(Quietened, carried only be being)

Does the child be quiet when he is carried rapidly or given
some thing?
(Quietened, carried only by being rapidly)

Does the child be quiet when rocked?
(Rocking amel.)

Is the child scared when rocked?
(Rocking agg.)

The child is very gentle, never troublesome because he
knows that his parents have to work?
(Mild, yielding, Recognizes reality and accepts)

AK


--- Page 24 ---


--- Page 25 ---
Name of Medicine
l Aconite

2 Agaricus

3 Alumina

4 Antim Crud

5 Arsenic Album
6 Belladonna

7 Bismuth

8 Bryonia

9 Calcarea Carb
10 Causticum

11 Chamomilla
12 China -

13. Cina

14 Cocculus _
15 Coffea Cruda
16 Conium mac
17. Crocus Sativa
18 Crotalus H

19 Curprum Acet
20 Drosera

21  Elaps Cor

22 Gelsemium
23 Hepar Sulph
24 Hydrastis

25 Hyoscyamus
26 ~=Ignatia

27 ‘Jalapa

28 Kali Brom

INDEX

Page
66
147
95
104
62
1
142
46
50
114
B
89
79
6
131
136

145
132
126
143

41
146
123

15

129
137

Name of Medicine Page
29 —Lachesis 100 -
-30 Lycopodium 92
31. Lyssin 85
32 Lac Can 133
33. Medorrhinum 141
34 Natrum Mur 36
35 Niccolum 139
36 = Nitric Acid 125
37 Nux Vomica 69
38 Opium 10
39 = Petroleum 91
40 Phosphoric Acid 135
41 Phosphorus . 116
42 Platina 138
43 Psorinum 140
44 Pulsatilla 54
45 ~ Rhus Tox 110
46 Sepia 59
47  Spigelia 127
48  Stramonium 20
49  Staphysagria 98
50 Sulphur 27
51  TarentulaH 81
52. Tuberculinum 119
53 Veratrum Album 121
54 ZincumMet 106
55  JanScholten's 148
Themes of elements
Pa

i a


--- Page 26 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

BELLADONNA

Belladonna is considered as a short acting medicine or the
medicine of first stage for cases of inflammation with heat,
burning, redness. Dr. M.L. Sehgal told us that this medicine alone
cures 30-35 percent cases. It cures not only acute but even
chronic cases. Dr. Sehgal has not said anything wrong or has
added nothing on his own. When 'Materia Medica Mind' was
formed, we came to know that Belladonna has maximum number
of mind rubrics i.e. 681. Everything is written in the Mind section
of our repertory. We have observed in the last 10 years that a
single dose of Belladonna works for months together and can

cure diseases like Psoriasis.
MAIN RUBRICS :

HHH HH HH HHH HHH Heese ees

Carried desire to be fast

Frivolous

Laughing speaking when

Smiling involuntarily

Hides things

Light desire for

Calculating inability for

Delusion poor he is

Feigning sick

Now well now sick (Added by Dr. Sehgal)
Attention seeking (Added by Dr. Sehgal)
Anger less or momentarily (Added by Dr. Sehgal)
Naive

Credulous_

Benevolence

Unreliable in promises

Delusion wealth of

Naked wants to be

Superstitious

Objective reasonable


--- Page 27 ---
NO

Homoeopathy and Mind
EXPLANATION OF MAIN RUBRICS :

1. Carried desires to be fast : This patient wants immediate
relief. He says that homoeopathy works very slowly that's why
he had never opted for it. He wants some medicine which would
give him instant relief.

2. Frivolous : He is not serious about his illness | "Lack of
seriousness”. In usual conditions, other patients are very much
concerned about their illness, but this patient is careless. Even
today he has come to you when he is compelled by some member
of his family.

3. Superstitious : He has no logic for his thinking. He has
no solid reason for coming to you. He says, "My friend has
recovered, so | have come to you. If you can cure him, | will
also be cured." He might even say, "If his friend's arthritis can
be cured, why can't | be cured of chronic coryza.” Or he would
say, "Somebody told me that you are a good doctor and |
thought, | will recover." So he trusts i als without making
any enquiries.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

4. Light desire for : Light does not mean the light of electricity.
Here it means the desire to know about the illness. (To throw
light on disease). The patient will say, "Dr. Sahib, what | am
suffering from? Will | recover? Is there any need to go for some
X-ray, ECG, ultrasound etc. which might help in diagnosis. But
he .never asks many questions and never goes deeper. He just
wants to be aware of his illness.

5. Hides things, Hide desire to, Naked wants to be : He is
not always secretive. He will try to hide his illness for some time.
A patient of Belladonna cannot hide for long, he will soon tell. He
will even show the diseased portion. There is a desire to escape
from the direct confrontation with the illness.


--- Page 28 ---
|
‘oe
©
2
OF
®
°.
-£
°
=
=
Je
o
=
©
@
”)
@
a
a)
=
J
7
te
7)
”
be
&
fe
°
.]
oe
-o
mn)
Q.
<

Homoeopathy and Mind

6. Laughing speaking when, smiling involuntarily : You
will observe that a patient of Belladonna laughs and smiles
involuntarily while telling his symptoms. He will even answer your
questions laughingly. Smile comes on his face automatically
because he never takes things seriously. He is frivolous, he wants
to hide something that's why he smiles. You will observe this
during your case taking. Few of our friends say that this is a
common thing. But Dr. Sehgal says that you have to catch the
Same common thing, you have to understand the ordinary
symptoms (particularly in ladies), only then, when combined wit
other rubrics, this medicine covers 30-35 percent cases.

7. Naive : Trusts everyone without making any enquiries.
8. Credulous : Follows everyone, willing to believe easily.

9. Unreliable in promises : He never keeps his promises.
You asked him to take a precaution and not to eat a particular
thing, he would come and say that he did not take it, but then
admits laughingly that he couldn't control.

10. Feigning sick, attention seeking : He magnifies illness
out of proportion just to seek attention. "Whenever | see that my
husband is back home, | start moaning. | just want that he should
at least enquire about my health." She doesn't want much
attention.

11. Objective reasonable : The patient gives a solid reason
for coming to the doctor. If he perseveres or he stops taking
medicine, he gives reasoning. He says, "| was cured of the same
problem earlier also, now it will also be cured." For every condition
he has reasoning.

12. Benevolence: Kind and helpful.

13. Calculating inability for : The patient is not able to


--- Page 29 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

calculate the intensity of his problem. On asking since how long
is he suffering from this problem, he replies, "Since 10-15 years
or | don't know exactly." On asking about his age, he says, "about
35-40 years, you can write anything." He cannot calculate the
duration or intensity of the things, perhaps because he is frivolous.

FEW TYPES OF BELLADONNA PATIENT :

1. ."Doctor sahib, I have this problem. Somebody told me today
or the last evening and | decided immediately to come to you.
(Laughs) Give me some medicine which will cure me fast. People
say that homeopathy acts very slowly that is why | never go for it.
What is my disease? Is there any need to go for blood test, urine
test, x-ray, ultrasound etc. My friend told me that you have cured
him." (Laughs)

Rubrics from this paragraph :

1) | Carried desire to be fast

lt) — Light desire for

It!) Laughing speaking when

IV) Superstitious

V) Credulous

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy &

2. "Doctor sahib, this is my problem. Few days ago my friend
told me but ! am careless. (Laughs) He has been cured by you,
so | think | will also get well. (Laughs) (Though his friend was
suffering from some other illness). Even today my wife compelled
me to take medicine .
Or

"| was just passing through/| had come to the city and | thought
taking the medicine too. Will | be cured 7 Is there any need to go
for some test for the diagnosis of the illness?"
Rubrics from this paragraph :
Frivolous
Laughing speaking when
Superstitious
Naive

SS a

+++4


--- Page 30 ---
+ Frivolous

+ Unconscious, interrupted by screaming

(Unconscious means unaware, was not aware)
+ — Light desire for

You see that in the above two paragraphs, the patient has
not given any mental symptom. They have conversed in the
layman's language which we have converted into mind rubrics.

3. This patient seeks attention and starts moaning whenever
the husband comes. She want to magnify illness for just a little
attention.

Rubrics :

+  Feigning sick

+ Attention seeking (Dr. Sehgal)

+ Light desire for

+ Sensitive to light

4. _Hewill try to hide his abnormal spots on the face or limbs.
He thinks that he is special and doesn't want to spoil his
impression. But he can't hide for long. He laughs and shows the

+ Hides things

+ Delusion poor he is

+ Sensitive to light

+ Pompous important

+ Naked wants to be

+ Frivolous

+ Laughing, speaking when

5. "lam tired of this illness, its better to die." And starts
weeping.

Rubrics :

+ Death desires anguish from (only Belladonna)

+ Anguish, weeping, with (only Belladonna)

+ Suicidal pains with



--- Page 31 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind
COCCULUS INDICUS

KINGPIN OF COCCULUS INDICUS:
"Recognise reality and accepts it"

Actually the rubric is "Recognises everything but cannot
move.” But Dr. M.L.Sehgal has changed it to "Recognises reality
and accepts it". This means that the patient recognises the reality
and accepts it. He compromises without any regrets or grudges.
This is the focus of Cocculus and if you notice this sign, the case
never fails. If it is a case of Cocculus, even hundred doctors
would gelect the same medicine.

MAIN RUBRICS :
1. Recognises reality & accepts it _
2. Disturbed averse to being (both ways)
(feels concerned about others, mostly ignoring herself)
3. Contented

EXPLANATION : RECOGNISES AND ACCEPTS

The patient accepts the reality, if he feels anger he never says
anything wrong to anyone, because he thinks : ,

1. Silence is golden

2. What can't be cured must be endured

3. There is no end to quarrels.

4. Daughters, sons, daughter-in-laws, or parents will not
change. Its better to keep quiet. Why to torture ourselves with a
quarrel. It only disturbs the peace of mind.

5. « Ifwesay something, we hurt others and disturbs ourselves.
6. Whether they make it five or fifty, whether they make or
destroy it in theirs. If they lose, it is theirs money, they lose, if
they save, it is theirs gain. We have enjoyed our lives and made
a lot for the children. We are quite contented with our lot.

A Compromising Patient
The patient believes "What cannot be cured must be endured."

~

€

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy #7


--- Page 32 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

INDIFFERENCE, LIES WITH EYES CLOSED

In this rubric the patient knows from the inner sense that
the time is passing or something is happening around him but he
does not give any attention towards these. Even he knows that
somebody is calling him yet he pays no attention and doesn't
respond because he doesn't want to be disturbed.

DISTURBED AVERSE TO BEING

; A patient lying on his bed or sitting in his chair wants to
remain as such. He wants to remain quiet and not to be disturbed.

But at the same time when others are doing their work, watching

television or talking to each other, doesn't affect or disturb him at

all. He understands the situation that he is sick and neéds rest

and why should others suffer from his illness. They should do

whatever they want to do but should not disturb him. He doesn't

want to be disturbed in any position in which he is lying. He shows

no interest in his surroundings.

RUBRICS :

1. Indifference, lies with eyes closed.

2. Recognise reality and accept it

3. Disturbed averse to being

DULLNESS, UNDERSTANDS QUESTION ONLY AFTER
REPETITION

Due to confusion of mind, the patient cannot understand
the conditions at once. Slowly and slowly when the events are
occurring repeatedly the confusion vanishes, and he becomes
able to understand the things.
Example : A patient getting worse from taking the stimulants but
he continuously takes, doesn't understand the process because
of dullness, but when it causes discomfort again and again, only -
then he realises that it causes discomfort and should be avoided. .

OTHER RUBRICS:
1. Anxiety, others for
2. Cares, others about



--- Page 33 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

3. Fear, health of others about
4. Anxiety, health about, relatives of ©

If he is in pain at night, he will never disturb others because
he feels that they are tired from the day long work. He is more
concerned about other's sleep. He will get up himself and prepare
tea, takes his medicine himself. But at the same time if someone
in the family is ill he himself will not sleep if someone else is ill
and will care too much.

FEW OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Sadness as if insults from
2. Sensitive to rudeness
3. _ Sits still wrapped in deep sad thoughts and notices nothing
as if
He feels sad if sons, daughter's-in-law or daughters ignore
or are rude but will never say anything. He will be quiet because
he thinks it is useless to complain.

ANOTHER RUBRIC :

+ = Anger interruption from

(strong displeasure felt at the breaks experienced in smooth
functioning of any thing )

Strong displeasure felt at the breaks experienced in smooth |
functioning of any thing e.g. if there is pain in elbows or shoulders
or any difficulty in wearing clothes, but he will never complain
thinking it to be a futile effort.

‘FEW OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Content

+ Reverence for those about him

(Cocculus is not in : Avarice, Fear poverty of, Bargaining,
Delusion injured is being, Praying, Religious etc.)

The patient is satisfied with relationships, surroundings,
money, business and everything. What ever he has is sufficient
for him. He has full satisfaction. He feels things move on quietly.
What is the use of crying for more. Sons and daughters are caring.
He respects other's sentiments, respects elders.

ssociation

for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy J

ee:


--- Page 34 ---
‘Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Homoeopathy and Mind

IN CASE OF CHILDREN SUFFERING FROM FEVER OR
SOME OTHER ILLNESS:

OaAhwWN =

Playful

Duilness, understands questions only after repetition
Recognises reality & accepts it

Disturbed aversion to being

Cares others about

Playful

The child is playful ignoring his illness. When the condition

deteriorates, he lies down alone. He never bothers his parents.
if they have time, its well and good, if they don't, he won't be a
trouble for them. He will say, "Go and manage your work.” If
some one disturbs him by making any sound or music (tape
recorder) he consoles himself by saying, "They must enjoy, as
they are happy. Why should | spoil their happiness?" When the
fever goes away he will get up and start playing.

FEW OTHER RUBRICS:

OONAARWNH >

Fear, noise, sudden of

Fear events sudden of

Nymphomania, menses suppressed after
Delusion, wicked deeds, she had committed
Insanity, amenorrhoea from
Slowness

Dullness

Time, passes too quickly, appears shorter
Indolence, difficulties in face of.


--- Page 35 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

OPIUM
KINGPIN OF OPIUM:
Fear, extravagance of

MEANING OF FEAR EXTRAVAGANCE OF :

The meaning of fear extravagance of is, “In excess of, what
is in one's estimation, is the right limit-scared to cross the limits
they have in their minds.” He will not take medicine many days
but will come when the problem increases i.e. for some days he
remains, "Indifference, suffering, to."

Fear extravagance of, is its central theme. Dr.M.L.Sehgal
applied this rubric for the first time regarding illness, otherwise it
was considered only in the matters regarding money that -this is
the limit of the man regarding his expenses, he can't bear more.

MAIN RUBRICS :

1. Indifference suffering, to;

2. Stupefaction arouses with difficulty
3. Fear, extravagance of

Then why have you come today?

Today the problem has increased.

Or (They (his family members) asked me many times to
see you).

Q: Since when have you been suffering?
A: For the last...... days.
(may be five, ten or fifteen days)
Q: Did you take any medicine?
A: No, sir. '
Q: Why didn't you take any medicine?
A: | didn't bother.
Q:
A:

RUBRICS :
+ Fear extravagance of
+ Stunsnecpion

¢

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 36 ---
_
<=
he
et
©
Qa.
fe)
®
le]
L
[e}
<=
s
c=
©
dew
co
®
ie)
@
~
Oo
=
Sad
c
9
2
wv)
ban
o
hee
p=
S
~~
8
o
[e)
2]
”
<<

Homoeopathy and Mind

Q: Why did you think of homeopathy?

A: My friend has been cured by you. Some one else also
advised me to take homeopathy and suggested your name. |
have heard that it cures the disease from the roots etc.
RUBRIC :

Superstitious : [No logical reasoning]

OTHER RUBRICS:
1.  Ailment from fright, accident, from sight of an

(Aconite, Caic Carb, Opium)
2. Anguish, shock from, injury in
3. Anxiety, fright, remains, if the fear of the fright

He saw an accident at a particular period and has been
suffering since then. Many cases have been cured just depending
on the cause i.e. this problem is after fright.

OTHER RUBRICS:

+ Delirium blames himself for his folly

Folly means : to be silly or stupid

Because of my foolishness this has happened. He blames himself
for his problem. .

In a chronic case of skin eruption and post nasal discharge from
25 years, the patient was cured just with a single dose of Opium
30, on the basis of two rubrics:

1. Delirium blames himself for his folly

2. Superstitious ‘

OTHER RUBRICS:
1. Fear, extravagance of
2. Irritability, pain during

During the treatment, the patient says, "I am taking
medicines from so many days but there is no improvement." The
patient can say this either after five days or five months when his
limit of tolerance is crossed. He will get irritated and say, "I should
improve at least a bit. It has never taken so long previously."
That means it has crossed his limits. This type of wording is also
very useful to prescribe Opium when patient is taking medicine


--- Page 37 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

and then shows his extravagance.

OTHER RUBRICS:

1. Indifference suffering, to
Indifference, complain does not

3. Asks for nothing

4. Wants nothing

5. Content

6. Content & quiet ©

7.

8

9

Content forgets all his ailments and pain
Courageous
. Delusion well she is
10. Indifference joys to and suffering to
11. Irritability aroused when
12. Danger, no sense of danger, has
13. Fearlessness
Whatever may be his condition, whether it is his illness

or his family circumstances, he is satisfied and contented. He
never raises any hue and cry. He never remembers his illness or
pain. He has no desires, no demands. (As if some addict is under
the influence of crude Opium).

>
=
=
=
Ls]
oO
te)
®
oO
=
°
x
oe
c=
oO
=
Ls)
feb)
”
®
Ye -
(>)
=
r=)
c
St
oO
Uv)
-_
fe)
=
=
Oo
3S
a
oO
oO
")
2)
<

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Alert

+ Cautious

+ Elevation mental

+ Plans gigantic
He is always alert, optimistic and makes gigantic plans. He

becomes first indifferent to suffering, then when problem

increases become alert and. cautious.

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ = Indignation discomfort from general
+ A/F shame

+ Embarrassed ailment from
She feels insulted if ignored. She feels ignored even at:


--- Page 38 ---
>
if
—_
~~
La]
a
°
o
°
=
o
Ee
=
rs)
he
Ls}
am «)
”
-%
aw
[*)
&
=
c
9
LS)
i¢p)
me
°
£
4
ie
i)
ie)
o
”
<

Homoeopathy and Mind

trifles. She feels too much shame, if she has pimples or scars at
uncovered parts i.e. on face onwards, will not go to attend school,
college, functions.
D.D.
Belladonna

The patient of Belladonna too feels poor physically if she
has pimples, scars etc., but she hides the scars/pimples for short
time and attends school or college, function etc. In Belladonna it
tras no deep impact.

FEW OTHER RUBRICS : Which have not been used much.
Fear murdered of being

Delusion criminal, executed to be

(Execute: To put to death, a sentence of death)

Delusion stabbed, somebody threatened to stab him, as if
Delusion injury is about to receive

Escape attempts to, run away

Bite, hands bites

++++ +4

SET OF OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Benevolence

+ Generous too much

+ Business neglects his

+  Clinging, grasping at others

SET OF OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Well says he is, when very sick
+ Delirium well declares she is
+ Delusion well he is
+ Delusion honie away from, is, away from must get there
+ “Discouraged alternating with hope
+ Groping as if in dark

He is groping in the dark and doesn't know how to come
out of this problem, he will ask his doctor to suggest himtaqwyhom
he should consult.


--- Page 39 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

SET OF OTHER RUBRICS :

Insanity masturbation from

Dementia masturbation with

Despair masturbation in

A/F shame

Obscene songs, singing.

A boy aged 18 years, became depressed and insane due
to excess of masturbation. He stopped going to his college and
lost his interest in commission agent shop where he was working
side by side. He felt ashamed of the act i.e. masturbation and he
thouyht that he has wasted all his energy and has done some
sinful act. He was cured with Opium 30.

+++

Association for Scientific Research tn Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 40 ---
i Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

HYOSCYAMUS
KINGPIN OF HYOSCYAMUS:
Fear betrayed, of being

TWO IMPORTANT RUBRICS ARE :
1. Affectation
2. Hide desire to

. He has a fear, to lose everything he owns. He never takes
risk. If he starts some business on partnership basis he will say
to his partner, "You first start the business, | will contribute money
afterwards as there are so many other works which | have to do
yet.” In reality he fears that if business fails, all his money put in
the business will also be finished.

He says to the doctor, "Dr. Sahib, be careful while giving

me medicine. | don't want my condition to deteriorate."
D.D.
Opium : Fear, extravagance of, the patient fears that his pain
might increase, fear of increase.
Hyoscyamus: Fear of being betrayed,-fears that his condition
might not deteriorate, fear of further loss from whatever health
he has.

EXPLANATION OF OTHER RUBRICS :

1. Fear of being betrayed
2. Groping as if in dark

The patient is in such a condition that he doesn't know
whether he would come out of it or not, if he has to change the
doctor, he will ask the present physician to whom he should
consult and which pathy to consult.

D.D.

Opium : "I don't Know how and when it has increased?" If asked
what happened prior to it, he would say that he doesn't know. Its
all dark. -

Hyoscyamus: "There isn’t complete darkness. | am afraid It is —



--- Page 41 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

increasing.”

Opium : "O.K. | leave your treatment but you = me where to
qo, whom to consult.”

Hyoscyamus : "| don't leave your medicine because you know
at least something about me , | don't want to spoil whatever relief
| have got." (This is a very definite statement - Dr. Yogesh Sehgal).

3. Indifference complain does not :
He doesn't complain about his pain, lies down quietly.

4.. Well says he is when very sick

The patient though is ill, he will say that he is OK. Old people
don't complain because they already are suffering from the people
around them. Children don't complain because they are afraid of
injections .
+ Delusion injured is being, surrounding by his
+ Fear injured of being
D.D.
Opium : "Indifference to suffering" he doesn't care for his suffering
but when the pain increases he runs to the doctor. 'Fear
extravagance of.’

5. Answers monosyliabi
He doesn't know what to reply.

6. Answers, no to all questions
He doesn't give much answers or begins with 'No’. It is
very difficult for him to answer because he is trapped in the dark.

7. Escape attempt to
He is afraid that his illness might go out of proportion so he
wants to escape. (Hide desire to, because of Fear betrayed of
being.)
D.D.
Opium : "This iliness has gone out of proportion. | am sick of it
and want to escape ." (Escape attempt to but not Hide desire to)

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 42 ---
‘Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

MM Homoeopathy and Mind

8. Light shuns

This patient never goes for a test because he is scared of
diagnosis. He is very scared of diseases like cancer. He will never
name the disease ,"I hope, its not ... that disease .”
D.D.
Belladonna: He will enquire, if there is any need to go for a test,
x-ray etc. which would help in the diagnosis. He will laugh and
get ready for the test . ‘Light desire for’
Cocculus : " Dr. Sahib, what is the need for the test, | have got
it done several times, but nothing has come out."

Or

"Oh ! What is the need to go for the test. It has already been
diagnosed. Leave it." Recognises reality and tells it plainly.

9. Affectation

He will say, "| am not scared of tests but who knows about
these people of laboratories, they might tell something eise. But
! am not scared of illness." But he will never go for a test.
(Suspicious and Fear betrayed of being and Light shuns.)

10. Inciting others

"| have heard a lot about you. You have cured many people,
but | will accept only when | get cured. If | get well, then you see
there will be a long queue of patients." (Wants to have the full
attention of the doctor)

11. Cautious .

He always makes notes about his illness, he will make a
list, will observe all precautions which you have told. He is very
cautious and doesn't want to be trapped. "Dr. sahib have you
cured a similar case before? | hope the medicine is of the best
company?" He will go to the dispensary (or medical shop), take
medicine and come to show you.

D.D. Regarding eatables
Hyoscyamus : First he will offer you to eat.
+ Fear poisoned of being


--- Page 43 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

+ Fear betrayed of being

Opium : First he will taste a bit of it

+ Fear extravagance of

Belladonna: He is naive, he gives a smile and eats
+ Naive

+ Frivolous

12. Delusion wrong has suffered

He feels that he has suffered wrong. Even if he himself has
made a mistake, he will blame others. He will say, "you made me
drink, you made me eat the pickle that's why | am suffering." He
thinks that he is suffering because of others. He will tell his
parents, "| am suffering because of you." OR "I am suffering
due to your wrong prescription.”
D.D.
Opium :
Delirium blames himself for his folly

"It is my mistake, | was careless that is why | am suffering."

13. Business talks of : "If | don't work, | will lose everything.”
D.D.

Opium : He will not bother for 2-3 days and keep lying in bed.
But when his limit is crossed he starts asking for treatment.

14. Bed desire to remain In : The patient desires to lie down
in the bed. If enquired about his health, he says that he is OK but
wants to remain in bed and does not complain. '
-In fever: He lies down quietly in fever or in any other illness. He
never complains. Indifference complain does not

D.D.

Argentum Nit : He complains a lot during illness.

+ Bed, remain in, desireto .

+ Lamenting, sickness, about his

+ Feigning, sickness

15. Spitting faces of people, in : He is blunt.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy-

-



--- Page 44 ---
Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

ua Homoeopathy and Mind

16. Truth tells plainly
He calls a spade a spade.

17. Inquisitive

He wants to know every minute detail. "Why this happens?
what is the matter? Have you cured a similar case before. Is
there any chance that this illness would acquire serious
proportion?" etc. )

18. Eccentricity
He doesn't bother much about the social norms. He will
always do whatever and however he wants to do.

19. Break things, desire to

He never bothers for social norms. He can easily break the
relationships, 'Naked wants to be’, he doesn't care much that
this thing is not allowed in our society.

20. Greedy, grasping with both hands
He is greedy and grabs with both hands whatever comes
to him.

21. Reveals secrets, Truth tells plainly, Naked wants to be
i.e. he can't hide things. He reveals the secrets "Reveals secret
and tells the truth plainly in front of anyone."

4



--- Page 45 ---
STRAMONIUM
MAIN RUBRICS :
1. Clinging, persons or furniture to
2. — Clinging, child awakens terrified, knows no one, screams,
clings to those near
3. Frightened, wakens terrified, knows no one, screams, clings
to those near
4. Moaning, shrieks with occasional, could only be pacified
by holding chest pressed closely to mothers breast (C.R.)
The face carries the impression of being terrified. So the child
clings to anyone till the terrifying thing is present .e.g. the child if
afraid of the dog clings to his mother. But when the dog goes
away i.e. (Delusion, danger impression, of) he will say, "I will hit
him with a stone if he comes again, | am not scared.” (Affectation).
(Affectation means projecting one's quality which in reality
is not original & is artificially acquired : desire to remain in limelight,
self projection to satisfy one's ego). .

OTHER RUBRICS :

1. Indifference, complain does not
2. _ Indifference to suffering

3. Helplessness, feeling of

4. Fear, injured of being

Elders : In a case, the patient of about 60 years of age said,
“Whom to complain? There is no one to listen to, the children
don't care. All the three sons have separated. So | never complain,
if | do, they will get angry." (It's a cry of helplessness).

Child :The child will not complain because he has the fear of
injections. If his stomach is aching, he will remain quiet because
of his fear of injection.

+ Fear injured of being

D.D. : .

Hyoscyamus : He has fear of injection (Fear injured of being)
but not of darkness where as in Stramonium there is both fear of
injection and darkness. —

Homoeopathy and Mind (ms

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 46 ---
21.

tation for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

oy

Assoc!

Homoeopathy and Mind

(Fear injured of being and Fear dark of)

Note: Though new additions in Complete Repertory has mixed
up everything and Hyoscyamus has also been added in ‘fear
dark of".

In Hyoscyamus there is no clinging but in stramonium it is very
prominent.

D.D. Meaning of following rubrics:

Indifference : "I have been suffering for the last 15-20 days .!
thought | would get well on my own. "| He knew of his pain but he
was apathetic.

Frivolous : "| noticed it today only but | don't know for how long
it has been there” or "Someone showed me these spots so |
came to know that | have got spots." Shows carelessness.

Affectation : If you ask him if he is ready for injection, he will
agree. But if you take out the syringe he will run to his mother's
lap. He poses to be brave but is not actually. "| can burst the
bomb even in my hands” But if someone else is bursting the
bomb even at a distance, he clings to his mother. He brags about
being brave but is scared even in his house.

D.D.

Hyoscyamus : He will not allow you to use stethoscope because
+ Fear injured of being.

+ Fear betrayed of being

+ Suspicious

Belladonna : Laughingly he will say, "OK inject me." or when
you use stethoscope he will keep on giggling, laughing.

Cocculus Indicus : First he will say, "See if medicine can serve
the purpose, it is OK, but if injection is required, | am ready for
injection. There is hardly any question of being afraid .



--- Page 47 ---
D.D. in children

Cocculus Indicus : "| don't have money now we will get it some
other time.” He will agree.

+ Asks for nothing

+ Content

(That means he has no demands. He is contented with whatever
he has) —

Arsenic Album : "Get me the thing immediately. | want it just
now." Otherwise he will get irritated.

# Quietened, carried only by being rapidly

+ Carried desired to be fast

Belladonna : "We will get you the thing till evening." He will wait
till evening. He is naive. He will trust you.

+ Carried desire to be fast

+ Naive (He will trust, will believe at little evidence).

Stramonium : He will cling to the toys. But when the father
threatens him, he will bow down, he will be quiet.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Clinging to furniture or persons but

Fear injured of being

Helplessness

Light desire for

Longing for sun shine, society & company

He needs glamour or company which can make him shine.
He wants to join the company where there is glitz and glamour like
at weddings and parties. He has great desire to join the company
of people who think alike, where he could talk from the heart. Bulb
is not sufficient, he requires four tubes. He enjoys being happy
and in the company of people. He is afégid of being alone and in
the dark.Even a kid would cry if lights“are put out. He is happy

+++

‘when surtpunded by people and lights are on. Even a kid of fifteen
I

days would cry-f the lights are put out. He will not sleep.
:

Homoeopathy and Mind [eZ

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 48 ---
keel Homoeopathy and Mind

esearch. in Homoeopatrhy

or Scientific

OTHER RUBRICS :

‘Imitation’ : To imitate others, they make out animal's voices. They
follow their elders as they see them like praying to God, they do
the same.

OTHER RUBRICS :
‘Delirium crying for help' : He will beg of you with folded hands,
"Please help me in getting out of this illness. | am sick of it."
1. Delusion injured of being
2. Praying
3. Begging
4. Delirium, crying for help
D.D.
Cantharis :
+ Delirium crying for help
+ Delusion injured is being
Both rubrics are common with Stramonium and Cantharis.
+ Cantharis
He is abusive, "you go to hell ! You bastards, do something
for me, | am dying.” He is blasphemous.
1. Abusive
2. Blasphemy

D.D. Definitions :

Delirium means excited, confused tone.

Delusion means inner eres feeling, false belief, exaggerated
feeling.

Help : Full help.

Aid : Along with self help he will ask for some outside help.

OTHER RUBRIC :

+ Delusion injury about to receive

He feels as if he will shortly suffer from some illness of either |
liver or kidney or any other organ.


--- Page 49 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Ra

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Company desire for
+ Fear of being alone
He desires the company of others so as to get some help
when required. He fears to be alone.

OTHER RUBRICS :
‘+ Bite desire to
+ Bites, people
+ Besides, oneself
+ Striking boy, clawing his father's face.
He wants to bite if you say something, he bites and goes
out of control. He claws his father's face.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ —§Clinging to persons or furniture

+ Superstitious

"| want to take medicine from you only. | trust YOU alone. You
cured my that disease, this will also be cured by you.”

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Clinging to persons or furniture
+ Superstitious

+ Delirium, crying help for

Light, desire for

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

+
D.D.
+ Fear injured of being (Both Hyos & Stram)
+ Delusion injury is about to receive (both Hyos & Stram)

In Stramonium there is light desire for, but in Hyoscyamus,
he shuns the light.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Delusion‘alone in the wilderness

+ Delusion alone she is always

+ Longing for sun shine, society & company for



--- Page 50 ---
iy

-Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

ram Homoeopathy and Mind

vai fea

+ Weeping touched when

+ Weeping sad thoughts at

+ ‘*Helplessness feeling of

+ Delusion danger impression of

Feels loneliness, "! am all alone!" After the death of her husband
this feeling comes in her mind that she is all alone. She cries
while talking about her husband's death. (Weeping touched
when). She doesn't want to remain alone. She wants to be
surrounded by people. Whenever she remembers her past, she
starts crying and feels helpless. She feels lone in this wilderness.

D.D.

Ant. Crud.

+ Weeping touched when

+ Anger touched when

+ Love sick

She is love sick, always lost in the Poughts of her beloved and
cries whenever he talks about him.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Delusion, poor he is

+ Helpless feeling of

# Delusion, business ordinary, they are pursuing

"| am a poor man, | am helpless and have no other alternative.’

OTHER RUBRICS :

Delusion, beautiful, she is beautiful & wants to be more

Delusion, dogs attack him, biting his chest

Delusion, executioner, visions of an

Delusion, honest, he is not

Delusion, joy nothing ¢ could give her joy

Delusion, mdfdered Yoasted Beaten he was

Delusiog power oy over ailldisease he has

Betusion Ged cofgmunication with hei Be
iustn pangytthings, appear: hie were; very large =

ak = \


--- Page 51 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Rg

+ Eyes, evades the look of other person

+ ~~ Fills, pockets, with anything

+ Naked, constantly wants to be

+ Praying

+ Piety, nocturnal

(Piety means dutiful, devotion to God and observance of religious
principle, reverent)

+ Singing, Latin paternoster (The lord's prayer)
+ Religious, bible wants to read all the time

+ Dancing

+ Delusion, die he was about to

+ Delusion, disease, every disease, he has.

OTHER RUBRICS :

1. Shrieking, screaming, shouting cannot, but wants to scream
2. Delusion alone she is

3. Helplessness feeling of

4. _ Indifference complain does not

"| want to scream loudly, but | never do. There is no one to listen
to my woes. | am all alone, all my sons have got separated, there
is no one to console me."

_
ie
Per]
Cs)
Qa
°.
®
°
P=
°
<=
£
=
oO
=
®
[«h)
”
@
~
Oo
we
=
¢
@
()
VY)
—
je)
Y=
fe)
-
Ss
oO
°
wn.
2)
_{



--- Page 52 ---
4@ Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

SULPHUR

We are using Sulphur frequently on the basis of mind
symptoms. No physical symptoms have ever been taken, no
miasms have been considered. If we gave Sulphur in 100% cases
on the basis of these mind symptoms, then at least 80 % cases
recover fully.

MAIN RUBRICS :

+ = Anger alternating with repentance quick
(Sulphur, Crocus & others)

+ = Irritability, remorse easy & quick (Only Sulphur)

When he is in rage, he speaks off or hits the person but he repents

later that why he spoke or why he hit the children. He repents

quickly.

+ Amusement aversion to

+ Music aggravates, palpitation on listening to music

+ Religious affectation

+ Anxiety salvation about, po ee as to their religious

. practices, too

+ Religious speculations dwells on (Only Sulphur) asking
"Who made God"

Speculation means a theory or opinion arrived at through

speculation, to conjecture without knowing complete facts.
Aversion to music / amusement, he gets restless. But he

loves devotional /religious cassettes.

Q. Tell us about anger. When you feel angry, do you speak

out or hit the children ?

A. Yes, | do feel angry, speak out, even hit the children.

Q. Doyoulike music or listening to songs on T.V., tape recorder,

stereo?

A. | don't like them. | get restless. It starts palpitation. | ask

them to stop.

Q. Do you like religious cassettes? Do you listen to religious

programmes aired on T.V.? ©

.A. Yes, | like them, | hear Gurbani/Kirtan/Satsang.


--- Page 53 ---
Homoeopathy.and Mind

Second striking feature of his personality is that either he
is a spendthrift or is careless for spending money. He doesn't
bother for his work because he thinks that he has got enough of
everything Or he bothers too much about his work. He feels that
he is deteriorating both in health and money matters. He fears of
poverty and beggarly position.

RUBRICS :
One side :
+ Delusion, wealth of
+ Delusion, abundance of
+ Frivolous
+ Business, neglects his
+  Avarice, alternating squandering
Other side :
+ Anxiety, business of
+ Business, talks of
+ Delusion, thin is getting
+ Fear, poverty of
+ Fear, starving of
+ Delusion want, he will come to
+  Carefulness
+ Cautious, anxiously
He bargains a lot. If you ask whether he pays the price
_whatever the shopkeeper asks for or he bargains. He may say
‘that he doesn't bargain. But when you ask him by using some
, different word in place of bargaining like 'do you purchase things

with intelligence or pays whatever the shopkeeper asks for' then

_he will say that he purchases with intelligence. There are better
“chances of his acceptance. ag use word ‘intelligence’ in place
of ‘bargaining.

RUBRIC : ,
Bargaining (Bryonia, Pulsatilla, Silicea, Sulphur)

>
<&
=
oe
©
for
(eo)
®
me)
=
()
<
.—
<=
oO
pes
G
tel)
”
®& «
.
oO
=
i=
a
©
i)
h
om
re)
s
2
oO
(2)
”
Cy
P< ae



--- Page 54 ---
“ag Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

OTHER RUBRICS :

Third aspect is perseverance i.e. continuity of medicine.
The patient is taking the medicine but is not improving. If you
ask him that he is taking the medicine regularly and he is not
improving, whether he thinks that he would improve or not, the
patient replies that he is very hopeful that he would improve.
+ Perseverance
+ Hopeful
Perseverance means try & try again.
(In perseverance and hopeful are Sulphur and Aconite common,

‘but in Aconite there is alternation i.e. hopeful alternate with

despair)

Note : Just see that Aconite which was considered a short acting
medicine has the mind rubrics like perseverance and the patient
perseveres for improvement.


--- Page 55 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

CROCUS SATIVA
MAIN RUBRICS :
+ — Anger alternating with repentance quick
Cheerful music from (Singular)
Music ameliorates
Memory, active, music for (Singular)
Singing, Involuntarily, on hearing a single note sung
(Singular)
When we ask the patient whether she feels angry, she
replies in the affirmative. She admits that she bursts out, even
beat the children but then repents quickly. In quick repentance
Sulphur and Crocus go together. But when we talk of music there
are so many rubrics which are opposite in both medicines. This
patient enjoys music, his memory.is very sharp regarding songs
and starts humming as soon as the song comes. But Sulphur
has palpitation from listening to music.

+++ 4

A Case : On the basis of these rubrics many chronic cases have
been cured. A chronic case of Diabetes Mellitus was cured with
a single dose of Crocus Sativa 30. An old man of 55 years felt
quick repentance after anger and started singing involuntarily as
soon as he heard the song. Even his children used to chide him
for this. ;

>
<=
=
—
co
Qa,
fo)
o
(°)
E
[e)
a
£
&
(>)
&
cs]
®
”
®
~
Oo
=
hs
9
oO
YW)
t=
je)
Mes
|
oO
=
s
Oo
°°.
2)
”
<

A Case of OCN: Similarly there was a case of obsessive
compulsive neurosis i.e. compulsive desire to do something like
washing hands repeatedly, to check whether the gas cylinder
has been put out or not etc. Instead of making a long case history
and studying other rubrics, only these rubrics helped in giving a
single dose of Crocus 30 which cured the patient.

OTHER RUBRICS: .

1. | Remorse, quickly repents -

2. Rage, repentance, followed by
3.. Cheerful alternate with quarrelling


--- Page 56 ---
>
<=
i
—
oO
a
Lo)
o
i)
E
a ©)
ta 08
£
SS:
[$)
t
Ls]
®
2)
_o@
~
©
e
=
b=
o
0
”
ed
2
c
Ss
~~
i
Oo
(e]
”
”
b= §

Laughing alternate with quarrelsomeness (Singular)
Laughing alternate with tenderness (Singular)
Loquacity, jesting, with

Loquacity witty (Singular)

Mildness alternate with hardness
Quarrelsome alternate with singing (Singular)
Singing alternate with anger (Singular)
Weeping alternate with laughter

Whistling

Yielding disposition

Nymphomania

Kisses everyone

Contrary .

D.D. Belladonna

Belladonna patient is also happy and cheerful but is
frivolous. He has no anxiety, no worry. He also likes music but
there is no repentance in Bell. Bell has violent but momentarily

anger.
+ + Laughing speaking when

+ Frivolous

# Anger momentarily (Dr. Sehgal)



--- Page 57 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

IGNATIA

MAIN RUBRICS :

Audacity (Ignatia is on the top)
Courageous

Approached by persons being agg.
Defiant

Quarrelsome

Injustice cannot support
Admonition kindly agg.

ee oe

Meanings
Audacity : Daring, brave, fearless, never bothers about himself
or consequences
Courageous : The ability to control fear when facing danger or
pain and brave.
Defiant : resistance, disobedience

Even if he doesn't have the courage and the opponents
are stronger, yet if he feels that something wrong is happening
he will rebel, thinking it to be his duty. He thinks that it is his duty
to speak against injustice. He will defy even the stronger and
the more powerful. It aggravates him if someone tries to advise
him not to behave like that.

OTHER RUBRICS :

1. Disconcerted q

2. Delusion, disease incurable he has an

(Nux Vomica, Staph, Causticum are not in both of these rubrics)
He is sure that he will never recover, this illness is incurable

and his hands are up. He can think the same either for the .

condition of the society or for himself .
D.D.

Bromium :

+ Disconcerted

+ Carried desire to be fast (Not Ignatia)

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 58 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

OTHER RUBRICS :

Company aversion to

Reserved

introverted

Talk indisposed to, suffering over his

Hide desire to

Secretive

This is a common symptom of Ignatia that he never wants
company. He wants to be quiet, never talks about his illness and
hides his pain from others.

SakwON =

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Ailments from disappointment, new (Singular)
2. Grief, losing object/person after
3.  Ailment from death of a child, parents or friends of
4. _ Prostration of mind, grief from

Grief plays a very important role in Ignatia. After the death
of some near or dear (child, parents, friend) he is grieved and his
problems start due to this grief. He wants to remain alone and
weeps alone and likes no music etc.

OTHER RUBRICS: .

5. Love, silent grief with .

6. Mildness, bears suffering, even outrage, without
complaining |

7. | Cowardice, opinion without courage of‘own

OTHER RUBRICS :

Irritability, contradiction from slightest
Wildness trifles at

Abusive, insulting

Admonition kindly agg.

Kicks with legs

Consolation, kind words agg.
Irritability, pain during

NOAAAON =


--- Page 59 ---
| Homoeopathy and Mind

8. Amusement, averse to
9.  Shrieking, aid for
10. Introspection

He is very hot tempered. If someone tries to contradict him,
he goes violent, wild, abusive, even hits. He hates if someone
tries to advise him. He hates sympathy. He is averse to everything
that makes him laugh. Repents only at a later stage that he has
done something wrong, a great injustice.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Injustice cannot support

Ailment from punishment

Punishment aggravates mental symptoms

Consolation aggravates

Admonition kindly agg.

Sensitive reprimands to

If you rebuke him without any mistake, he gets very angry.
It aggravate him if you try to make him understand or show
sympathy.

OaAhkoONn=

OTHER RUBRICS :

Ailment from, financial, loss (of wealth or property)
Ailment from money, from losing

Ailment from place, loss of

Delusions, vow is breaking

Fear, position to lose, his lucrative

Sadness, fortune from, reverse of

This group of rubrics has given good results in cases of
financial loss.

Seeocutonn for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

OakoON>=

OTHER RUBRIC :
+ Charitable

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Delusion criticized she is
2. Delusion insulted he is


--- Page 60 ---
Sa Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy.

3. Delusion laughed at, mocked being
4. Delusion neglected his duty he has
5. Delusion wrong he has done
6. Sensitive to moral impression (means when principles
regarding right conduct are not adhered to)

He feels that perhaps because he has done something
wrong or not fulfilled his duty, people laughing at him or talking
about him or insulting him.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Delusions, ruined she is

Sadness, love from disappointed

Ailment from friendship, deceived

Ailment from love, disappointed

Fear, hurt of, being emotionally

Feigning sick

Ailment from losing, object/person from

Insanity, grief from

Insanity, love, from disappointed

Sighing, hysterical

Tears things

He has been ruined because of disappointment in love. He
is scared that his feelings might get hurt. He goes insane after
being disappointed in love. He sighs deeply and tears clothes.

Sao ee Se NS=

-0O

OTHER IMPORTANT RUBRICS :

1. Grunting ;

Hide desire to

Secretive

Playful

Music is agreeable

Romantic feeling

Travel amel. (Ignatia singular)
Weeping, cannot weep though sad
Weeping, contradiction from
Weeping, music from ;
Weeping, refused when anything

err

=o: °:


--- Page 61 ---
NATRUM MUR
MAIN RUBRICS:
1. Objective reasonable

2. Hopeful

Q. Why have you come for homeopathy today ?

A. _ | have earlier recovered from this illness with homeopathy

(Objective reasonable) so | hope | will recover now also. (Hopeful)
Or

| have got relief in few other diseases so | hope rest will also get
cured.

Although perseverance is not in Nat Mur but at least he
has some reason to take the medicine .

D.D.
Belladonna
1. Objective reasonable
2. Superstitious

"He told me that he is cured by you so | think | will also get
cured." He has come for the first time and there is superstitious
element along with objective reasonable and he is frivolous, naive,
credulous about his illness.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Dwells on past disagreeable occurrences, grieve therefore
to (Singular) ,

Delusion net as if ina

Love wrong person with (Out of social context)

Love married man with

Love silent grief with

Ailment from disappointment, old (New- Ignatia)

Ailment from love disappointed

Ailment from shame (Ign. Nat Mur, Op, Staph)

Delusion pitied he is on account of his misfortune and he

wept

+++ oosee

Homoeopathy and Mind [iB

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 62 ---
SM Homoeopathy and Mind

. Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Sadness weep cannot

Weeping, pitied if he believes he is

Anger consoled when

Rage consoled when

Morose questioned when

Anger answer when obliged to

Thoughts control of thoughts lost evening

Indifference women to

Aversion woman to

She keeps on thinking about her past, how she got involved
with a married man. She is ashamed of her failure in love and is
unable to come out of it. The same thing comes to her mind
again and again and she is unable to come out of this net. She is
sad but cannot weep. She starts crying if someone sympathises
on her bad luck, if someone tries to show sympathy she gets
violent because she does not like to be pitied. She feels sad if
someone talks about her affair and she gets very angry if
someone asks the same question repeatedly. She has developed
aversion to male sex because she thinks that all men are alike.

+++ ooeoes

OTHER RUBRICS :
Aversion children to, get children to, world is so bad,
Blasphemy & cursing
Despair future about
Absorbed as to what would become of him (Singular)
Anxiety future about
Delusion wretched she looks (When looking in mirror)
(She thinks that she looks like one who is surrounded by misery
and unfortunate conditions)

She is indifferent to the children, hates them and thinks
that there is no need to give birth to children because this world

+++4+44

- is very nasty. She has no hopes for her future and she is brooding

about her future. Whenever she looks at her reflection in the
mirror, she thinks that she is surrounded by problems. She thinks
that it is the reflection of the person who is very unfortunate.


--- Page 63 ---
(We applied this rubric in the cases of dark circles or freckles on
the face.)

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Delusion thieves see, thieves house in, and will not believe
the contrary until search is made.

He has delusions that he is surrounded by thieves. He will never

trust anyone unless he himself checks all the locks.

+ Company aversion to, alone amel. when, desire for solitude

(Arn, Nat Mur)

+ Talk indisposed to, desire to be silent
+ = Introvert
+ Music Amel.

Out.of habit he wants to live alone and be quiet. He likes
music and always listens to the songs. If he is in love, he wants
to be alone and listens to love songs. If he is heart broken, he
wants to be alone. But now the songs are different, he listens to
the sad songs.

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Company aversion to, pregnancy during
+ = Indignation, pregnant while ,
+ Delusion wretched she looks (when looking in a mirror)
+ Exclusive too

If the patient is a female, she thinks herself to be exclusive,
and she doesn't want company even during pregnancy. She thinks
that her bloated face and body would make her look ugly.

Or

The reverse can be applied.
+ = Talking amel. prolonged
+ Talking pleasure in his own
+ Company desire alone agg. when

OTHER RUBRICS :
* Anxiety alternate with indifference

Homoeopathy and Mind IR

for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Association


--- Page 64 ---
mal Homoeopathy and Mind

+ = Indolence, postpones the work
+ ~~ Anger, work about (Singular) .
+ Work, mental impossible exertion after

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Verses, asleep, on falling

+ Shameless, bed in

+ Cheerful, coition after
(industrious coition after - Calc Phos.)

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Abusive, children, insulting parents
+ Morose, children spoken to when
* Insolence, servants to chiefs, of

OTHER RUBRICS :

Duty, no sense of duty

Rudeness, employees to the chiefs, of

Jesting aversion to, joke cannot take a

Hatred persons of who offended him

Estranged family from his

Affection

Deceitful, sly, perjured (wilfully gives false evidence)

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

+++ +++ 4+

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Fear walking of (only Natrum Mur)
+ Fear falling when walking

OTHER RUBRICS ;
+ Delusion talks with spirits
+ Delusion conversing with spectres, ghosts he is


--- Page 65 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Hg

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Reverence for those around him

+ Generous stranger for

+  Avarice as regards his family, generosity for strangers
+ Estranged family from his

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Light desire for
+ Fear dark of

+ Anxiety dark in

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 66 ---
0)
<=
dh
a
@
2
°
ao
°
‘VE
: 6
<
1
tS
©
,
As)
@
2)
te)
~
oO
©
=
c.
2
[S)
”
i den
Re)
=
)
és
ue
o
°
°
2)
_.

Homoeopathy and Mind

GELSEMIUM
MAIN RUBRICS :
"+ Fear, self control of losing
+ Fear walking of
+ Will muscles refuse to obey the will, when attention is turned
away
+ Confidence want of self
The patient is always scared of falling down. He will make
effort and get up but again lie down because he is scared of

- losing his balance. There is lack of self confidence but he will get

up and try again.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Quiet wants to be

Disturbed averse to being

Spoken averse to being

Irritability spoken to when

Talk indisposed to, desire to be silent

"He wants total stillness around him" taught by Dr. Yogesh
‘Sehgal. Even drops falling down from the tap disturb him because

+++4+ 4

he thinks that with great difficulty he has gathered himself and

attained a stable position. He doesn't want to be disturbed. Even
some body's talk disturbs him. He refuses help of every kind. He
is scared of losing whatever courage he has. He takes help of
only those who really can be of help.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Clinging to persons, furniture etc.

Disturbed averse to being

Held Wants to be

Held being ameliorates

Clinging to mother (Dr. Sehgal)

Here Dr. Sehgal calls this ‘clinging’ as ‘clinging to mother’.
Because only a mother can understand the needs of her child.

++++4


--- Page 67 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

She sacrifices her comfort for the sake of her children. She sleeps
in the wet and makes her child sleep in a dry bed. So in
Gelsemium, the patient clings to his mother or someone who
cares for, like a mother.

D.D.

Cocculus Ind : Cocculus has nothing to do with the peaceful
environment around. Cocculus is only for 'Disturbed averse to
being’ and not ‘Quiet wants to be’, he thinks others should enjoy.
Bryonia Alba : Bryonia is more concerned about his own peace
of mind and not about the environment around. He thinks about
business and business alone.

+ Disturbed averse to being

+ Quiet wants to be

+ Business talks of ,

+ Fear, suffering of (Regarding money and business)
Gelsemium :

+ Fear of losing self control

+ Fear falling of

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Embarrassed, ailment after : He feels whatever has
happened or he has been passed through, shouldn't happen
again, it would be very difficult to bear the pain again.

The patient feels that she has overcome this pain with great
difficulty. So she fears that if it happens again, she won't be able
to bear it. God alone knows how she bore that pain.

OTHER RUBRICS:
Anticipation complaints from
Anticipation examination before

_ Fear failure of
Fear failure of examination in
Timidity, appearing in public about
Fear appearing in public of

+++++4

—
~ anime
dase
~~
[40] J
a
°
a
°.
=
3
x
a
x on
oOo
es
is]
[<l)
wv” .
®
[ed
o
=
ie
bon
2.
Ow:
”
;
RSJ
¢
re)
ic]
‘&
oO
3
a
a
&.


--- Page 68 ---
sm Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

+ Confidence, want of self
[Anticipation is to predict the event before it happens.]

The patient goes on anticipating that something bad might
happen. He might fail in the examination. He is scared of going
in the gatherings. He has a stage fright because he has no self
confidence.

D.D.

Fear superstitious : "Dr. Sahib, last winter | had this problem,
now the winters are approaching and | fear that the same problem
might happen again. So please give me some medicine so as to
escape from the coming problem.”

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Light desire positively (Dr. Sehgal)

' # — Clinging to promises (Dr. Sehgal)

The patient clings to the doctor/or the person who can
assure him of a cure. He will feel relieved of the burden because
of the assurance given by the doctor.

When you are taking up the case, he will keep on asking,
"Dr. Sahib, are you sure | would recover?” (Your confirmation
ameliorates him)

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Fear, dark of
+  Clinging, held being ameliorates

He is scared of:pessimism, so if the doctor does not assure
him of his recovery, he will stop taking the medicine. He is
interested only in that physician who gives him hope of recovery.
He needs cure and comfort, therefore he has clinging to persons
i.e. to mother or to the person who is like mother.

OTHER RUBRICS: .
+ Anxiety, time is set ifa .
+ = Anticipation, complaints from
When the fixed time of appointment comes nearer, he starts
getting nervous.


--- Page 69 ---
|
1.
|
D.D.
Argentum Nit
* Hurry to arrive for the appointed time
+ Hurry walking while
+ Hurry everybody must hurry
+ Hurry eating while

Even this patient feels very nervous. But opposite to
Gelsemium, the patient is always in a hurry. Gelsemium medicine.
is not found even in the main rubric of 'Hurry’.

‘Homoeopathy and Mind Bg

OTHER RUBRICS :

in children :

Clinging to mother

Disturbed averse to being

Fear falling of, child holds on to mother
Quiet wants to be

Fear falling of

Clinging grasps the nurse when carried
Fear dark of

+++ ++ +4

In case of fever : The child will never allow his mother to go
away and do her work, he will remain to his mother's lap. He
wants to be always with mother, if mother goes to the kitchen he
keeps on calling her or asks her to take him along with her in
kitchen. One dose of Gelsemium is sufficient.

Association for Scientific Research in Hémoeopatrhy

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Fearlessness (Singular)
2. Will muscles refuse to obey the will when attention is turned
away, i.e. muscles obey the will so long as the will is strong
3. Embarrassed ailments after

Inspite of being a coward, because of his courage he
overcome cowardliness by making the will strong. He overcomes.
many obstacles, then wonders, how he could do this.


--- Page 70 ---
som Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

+++ ++ $44 46$644+4444

OTHER RUBRICS:

Torpor i.e. dullness, prostration

Unconscious eyes can't open

Confusion of mind concentrate the mind on attempting to
Dullness urine ameliorates, copious flow of
Stupefaction urine ameliorates, copious flow of
Thoughts vanishing of, mental exertion on

Exhilaration recall things long forgotten, can

(i.e. exhilaration by recalling things of past)

Delusion sick someone else is

Delusion self control, she would loose all

Fear, heart cease to beat, unless constantly on the move
will

Ailment from, bad news

Ailment from, grief, shock mental

Anticipation dentist, physician before going to

Company, aversion to, avoids the sight of people
Weeping, cannot weep though sad

Grief cry cannot

a ee oe a ee a


--- Page 71 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Hig
BRYONIA ALBA -

EXPLANATION OF IMPORTANT RUBRICS :
1. Anxiety future about

"Dr. Sahib, get me well. Otherwise it won't be possible for
me to go to work. | am worried about my future."

2. Fear poverty of, Fear starving of, Industrious mania
for work: "Dr. Sahib, if | remain unwell, | will run out of money.
From where will | be able to feed my family. | and my family will
die of starvation."

3. Restlessness bed driving out of : "Dr. Sahib, | am so
much concerned about my work that | am unable to sleep. | get
so restless that | am driven out of bed."

4. Bed aversion to, get out of, wants to : The patient is
much worried about his work that he can't lie on bed. He wants
to get out of it and get back to work.

5. Disturbed averse to being, Quiet wants to be, Rest
desire for : He doesn't want to be disturbed when be suffers
acutely. He wants to lie down quietly in bed. Even he feels that
his bed shouldn't be disturbed. He wants complete stillness
around him. '

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

6. Business talks of, Speech delirious business of : But
he is happy if someone talks about business. Suppose his wife
tells him that there was a call from his office regarding business,
he will readily talk and give long instructions to the staff so as not
to make mistake: While talking, he will completely forget about
his illness. But if some friend or relative comes to meet him,
then he will ask his wife to tell them that he is not at home or is
sleeping.

7. Fear suffering of : “I am afraid that if this pain lasts for few


--- Page 72 ---
uM Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

more days, !| will run out of money." He is not worried much about
the pain like the patient of Calc Carb. He can bear the pain but is
more concerned about money.

8. Cruelty, inhumanity : This patient will never give a leave
to his subordinates even if he himself or anyone of his family
members, is sick. He will ask him to finish his work first. He says,
“This much work has to be done and you people do nothing except
asking for a leave."

9. Dirtiness, dirtying everything : He will not stop here (at
number 8) and will say, "People like you never want to work and
are always ready with excuses of somebody's illness. You people
want money without doing any work." He will say to his wife,
"You all females are alike. But its not your fault. You have been
trained like this by your parents. Your mother behaves just the
same with your father."

+ Anxiety others for - No

+ Cares others for - No

# Sympathetic - No

10. Thinking complaints agg., Company aversion to,
strangers aversion to the presence of : He is of the opinion
that thinking about problems aggravates the illness. So he doesn't
want anyone to visit him and enquire about his health. The
relatives shouldn't come because their continuous talk about
illness aggravates and also there is a lot of expenditure in serving
them tea and snacks.
+ Rebels against poultices
+ Touched aversion to being
+ Weeping nervous ail day

He gets touched and cries when people, relatives
continuously talk about illness and try to show sympathy.

11. SET OF RUBRICS:
+  Avarice,-anxiety about future from


--- Page 73 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Hig

Bargaining

Dishonest

Ungrateful avarice from

Kleptomania

He is dishonest and avaricious. He is ungrateful and is
always ready for bargaining and doesn't spare even the doctor.
He is a kleptomaniac and can steal even medicines.

++++4

12. Discouraged, discontented himself with : When he is in
bed, he thinks, "Il am worthless, just a cripple, unable to do
anything."

13. Ailment from mortification : When he is helpless and at
the mercy of others.

14. Suspicious : He is always suspicious about employees
that they have not done their work.

15. Violent deeds of violence, rage leading to : He flies into
rage if the others disobey him or don't do their work properly.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy:

16. Desires full of, Indefinite, More than she needs, Present,
things not, Unattainable things : He is full of desires, more
than required and which are impossible to attain.

17. Asks for nothing : He asks for the little things.

18. Mistakes localities in, Capriciousness : He makes
mistakes in telling the exact location of pain. Instead of telling
the pain in the legs he shows his ankles or hands and says, "Dr.
Sahib, | can't tell the exact place."

SET OF RUBRICS :
Perseverance

Delusion injured is being
Fear poverty of

+++



--- Page 74 ---
 f-
_-_
a.
oa
te)
°
£
(ol
=
=
<=
1S)
- | fe
13°)
®
”
[8
~
o
aes
=
=
[S)
Y)
te
oO
ain
c
e)
=
a
oO
~ #
vn)
_

Sa
oa

| Homoeopathy and Mind

Chooses the lesser evil (Dr. Sehgal)

Held being amel.
"| have been suffering from this illness continuously. | can't

spend much money. | am sticking to this place because
homoeopathy is cheaper than allopathy and has lesser side
affects."

OTHER RUBRICS :

+++ +++ ++ +

+++

Delusion work, accomplish her work, she cannot

Delirium business talks of

Irritability alone wishes to be

Anxiety do something compelled to (Ars added by Murphy)
Change desire for

Darkness, desire to lie down in the dark and not be talked to
Delusion beaten he is being

Delusion home, away from, is, away from, must get there

~ Delusion strange land as if in

Delusion strangers

control of under,

friends appear as

room seem to be in the
Delusion unfortunate he is
Despair recovery of
Escape attempts to window from
Rest desire for
Throws things away

A Case : A boy ran away from his house because he was beaten
by his grandfather. He recovered with this medicine.
Rubrics :

+
+

Delusion beaten he is
Escape attempts to, run away to


--- Page 75 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind fy

CALCAREA CARB

MAIN RUBRICS :

Fear, pain of

Fear, suffering of

Fear, operation of each
Fear, dentist of going to
‘Fear, hospital going to the

Poh =

OTHER MAIN RUBRICS :
Anguish, horrible things after hearing
Anxiety, cruelties after hearing of  -
Horrible things, sad stories affect her profoundly
Sensitive, cruelties when hearing of
Fear, see wounds to
Fear, shadow, his own shadow of
Ailment from, accidents sight of an
Cruelty children cannot bear to see cruelty at the movies.

ONAAAWN >,

There is a great fear of pain of suffering, of going to hospital for
checkup or operation. This patient is very sensitive. He can't
hear any cruelty. He can't see the wounds or accidents. The
children can't see violence even in cinema. We can say that he
is a ‘chicken hearted person.’

—— for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

D.D. with Bryonia Alba (Very clear different mind rubrics)

in Calc Carb there are many common rubrics of Bryonia =

1. Fear, poverty of

2. Fear, starving of

3. Fear, death hunger from

4. Fear, stomach arising from

In Calc Carb there is fear of pain. In Bryonia there is also

fear of pain because it will result in loss of business. 'Business

-talks of and 'speech business of' are not the rubrics of Calc Carb.

CC can't see violent scenes. He has anxiety others for, and he is

a boaster, braggart, squanders through ostentation but Bryonia
‘*is not in Horrible things affect her profoundly, Anxiety others for



--- Page 76 ---
a
pid
_
~~
iy)
Q.
O°
®
ie)
E
ie)
ps
=
Ass
oO
te
ise]
o
2)
{eb
[eg
Oo
=
Per)
c
9
oO
ip)
Py
je)
—
1
O
=
Ay
-O
[o)
7)
Y)
<<

Homoeopathy and Mind

and boaster.

Calc Carb even borrows from anyone. He is also 'Avarice
but squandering on oneself. He is not in ‘Bargaining’ because
Calc Carb is with Platina and Nat Mur in rubric "Exclusive too”.
Calc Carb is in "Delusion wealth of" and "Hopeful".

TWO IMPORTANT CHARACTERS :
4. SLOWNESS: Slowness in general and calculation is most
difficult task.

RUBRICS :
1. | Slowness calculation in
2. Calculating inability of, mathematics, inapt for

The patient of Caic Carb.never get confused but he can do
only one work at a time. He understands only one thing at a time.
They are very hard working and can never sit idle.

RUBRICS :

1. Irritable idle while

2. Sadness idle while

But on other side Calc Carb has

1. Duty no sense of

2. — Indifference duties to

3. Delusions, sick being

He is careless about duty. He will not work because he is ill.

STATUS ;

Egotism

Delusions, watched she is being

Fear, confusion, that people would observe her confusion
Delusion, confusion, others will observe her confusion
Fear, position to lose his lucrative

Boaster, squanders through ostentation

Borrowing from everyone

+++ ++ +h


--- Page 77 ---
He thinks that people are observing him/noticing him. He is
very conscious of his position/status. He cannot sit idle as it makes
him sad. He borrows and squander money through ostentation.
Because of his ego, he never borrows from anyone. He never
asks anyone to do him any favour. He will persevere. He thinks
that if he doesn't work, what right he has to eat.

OTHER RUBRICS :

1. Anxiety future about
2. Fear poverty of .

3. Irritable idle while

4.  Egotism

He is worried about his future. He is scared of poverty. He |

has ego so he gets irritated if he has to sit idle and depend on
others for.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Anxiety hypochondriacal, mania to read medical books
Light desire for

Fear of impending disease

Doubtful of recovery

Despair of recovery

He is hypochondriacal. He thinks that he is ill. He fears that
he might suffer from some illness from which he will never recover.
So he is always in search of some books, article or journal related
with medicine so as to get the information. |

Abon=s

OTHER RUBRICS : ;
+  Dwells, past disagreeable occurrences on
+  Dwells, grief, from past offences
+  Dvwells, recalls disagreeable memories

She dwells on past disagreeable occurrences and suffering,
e.g. how she was not allowed to go in for the interview by her in-
laws, or was not allowed to study further, or the mother-in-law
taunts her for bringing less dowry.

‘Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy


--- Page 78 ---
al Homoeopathy and Mind

OTHER RUBRICS :

Talks, murder, fire, rats; of nothing but
Fire, thinks and talks of

Spits, anger from

Kleptomania, steals money

+++4

for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Association



--- Page 79 ---
, caressed.

Homoeopathy and.Mind i
PULSATILLA

1. Consolation ameliorates this patient. She starts weeping
while narrating her sickness. Her pain gets aggravated while
narrating her symptoms and she starts crying. She desires to be

RUBRICS :

+ Consolation ameliorates

+ Weeping sickness, when telling of her

+  Narrating symptoms aggravates

+ Carried and caressed desire to be

‘Consolation amelioration from’ is very strong feature of Pulsatilla.

2. Heis avaricious. He is afraid of poverty and getting ruined.
Whenever he goes to buy anything he will bargain. He is always
worried about business/household chores. He feels as if he has
neglected his duties or he is being ignored.
RUBRICS :

Avarice

Bargaining

Fear poverty of

Delusion ruined will be, he

Cares fu'l of business about

Cares full of domestic affairs about
Delusion neglected his duty he has
Delusion neglected he is

Fear neglected of being

4

Association for Scientific Research in ——

+++ +++ +++

3. "Il am.all alone, | do not belong to anyone. | have been
forsaken by everyone." So she is very soft and has a yielding
disposition. If ever she gets angry, she never expresses,
consolation ameliorates her.

RUBRICS : ;
+ Delusion always alone she is, mat to anyone in family
she did not

+ Forsaken feeling



--- Page 80 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

+  Mildness
+ Yielding disposition
+ Consolation amel.
+ Carried and caressed desire to be
D.D.
Cocculus
He recognizes reality and accepts it. "He is neither
avaricious, nor bargainor nor he fear poverty of or getting ruined
of, Cocculus is contented. His tone is a clear indication of this.
compromised.
Nux Vomica
Fastidious (Puls, NV & others)
Avarice (Puls, NV & others)
Anxiety business about (Puls, NV & others)
Boaster, squander through ostentation (Puls, NV & others)
Fear opinion of others (Puls & NV)
Fear get talked about (Puls & NV) -
But Nux Vomica
+ Has bargaining
+ Has no weeping
+ Has no being alone feeling
+ = Is not in forsaken
And NV has
+ Generosity towards strangers, avarice regarding his family
+ Ardent '
+ = Injustice cannot support
+ Businessman worn out businessman
# Consolation aggravates
Arsenic Album
# Rest cannot until things are in proper order (Ars Alb)
+ Fastidious (Puls, Ars Alb & others)
+  Avarice (Puls, Ars Alb & others)
But in Arsenic Alb
+ Consolation aggravates

¢$+++4+4


--- Page 81 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind 56

>
bs}
-
—
Ls]
joe
fo)
®
°
=
ie)
x
£
tS
[S)
=
s]
o-
2)
®
~
[S)
=
ver]
fm
2.
[S)
”
hes
(2)
tee
Sc ~
oO:
pre)
ey
[o)
fo}
7?) _

Weeping, child like a
Delusion, disease incurable he has an
Despair, recovery of
Thoughts, disease incurable of
Carried desire to be fast
But Arsenic Alb
+ is not boaster
+ nosquandering through ostentation
+ not in bargaining
But in Puls :
+ Doubtful recovery of
+ Carried desire to be slowly

"| am not in hurry, take even more than due time”, i.e. he
wants to be treated without any trouble.

+++4+4

CASES :

(1) Case : A case of Epileptic fits recovered with Pulsatilla. The
patient was very timid and bashful (timidity, bashful). He was
very shy that what would people say about his fits. (Fear opinion
of others). He was bitter and got irritated if asked repeatedly
(Anger answer when obliged to).. He was afraid of saying no, he
didn't want to hurt anyone, didn't want to lose his friends/
relationships.

RUBRICS : '

Timidity, bashful

Fear, neglected to being

Fear opinion of others

Anger, answer when obliged to

Yielding disposition

Fear, offended of being

Fear neglected of being

He was cured with Puls 30/1 dose followed by P.L.

++++ ++ +

(2) Case : In a chronic case of joint pains, she feels that her
family ignores her, so she weeps. Sympathy and consolation



--- Page 82 ---
am Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

ameliorates.
+ Delusion, neglected she is
+ Weeping consolation ameliorates
She was cured with Pulsatilla 30/1 dose, followed by P.L.

(3) Case : "I feel lonely, | am being ignored." Regarding money
matter she said, "| spend money. | don't want to be talked about
or being forsaken, so | spend money."

Delusion neglected she is

Delusion alone she is always

Forsaken feeling

Boaster, squanders through ostentation

Fear, opinion of others

Fear, neglected of being

++++4+4

(4) Case : "| feel angry much, but I don't express it because | am
scared. | get nervous when | have to meet someone. For example
my heart beat has increased just now when | have come to you
for medicine.” She is fastidious i.e. keeping things neat and clean.

. She is afraid of poverty and has delusions of getting ruined.

Yielding disposition

Timidity, bashful

Fastidious

Avarice

Fear, poverty of

Delusion ruined will be, he

She was cured with Pulsatilla 30/1 dose followed by PLL.

++ o+o4

D.D. Puls. Sepia, Kali Carb
+ Weeping while telling her sickness (All three medicines)

Puls.

+  Narrating her symptoms agg.
+ Weeping, consolation amel
+ Doubtful recovery of


--- Page 83 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Hi

Sepia
+ Consolation agg.
+ Despair recovery of

Kali Carb

+ Consolation agg. —

+ Hopeful alternate despair
+ Discouraged alternate hope

OTHER RUBRICS :

Anguish tremulous, rest agg., motion amel.

Anxiety hot air as if in

Aversion marriage to

Marriage seemed unendurable idea of

Love with one own sex, homosexuality

Aversion sex opposite, religious aversion

Aversion women to, homosexuality with

Aversion men to, homosexuality with

Delusion, bed, naked man is wrapped in the bed clothes,
with her.

Restlessness, conscience of

(Instead of applying anger alternate repentance, in one case
| used this rubric and it was cured.)

>
£
be
J
@
“o.
ie)
o
ie)
e we
°
=
<£
1S)
_
w
®
0)
Q .
[0
oO
=
2.
aS
i
oO
vy)
oe
°
ba oa]
c
°
=
te
[S)
_O
e]
”
<x

+ $¢4¢4¢4+4+4+444


--- Page 84 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind
SEPIA

Whatever .! have read and understood practically about
Sepia in the last fifteen years, is her weakness either
economically, socially or physically. She has no desire to work
_because of her physical illness but at the same time, she doesn't
want to lose her position in society, she goes on doing all the
household chores and gets stifled within. She considered herself
very helpless and unlucky when she watches other people healthy
and happy. Everyday her tragedy begins in the morning. Because
of her illness she gets up worried and confused about her work.
She finds it difficult to get up early in the morning but she seus to:
get up against her desire to be in the bed.

RUBRICS :

Delusion, poor she is

Business, aversion to (Indolence)

Fear, society, of his position in

Undertakes, things opposed to her intentions
Anxiety, morning at

Confusion, morning at

Bed, desire to remain in, morning

on for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

i

pee ey h™

The patient of Sepia, like Opium can come late for the
medicine but she is not indifferent to her illness like opium. She
couldn't come to take medicine either because of family problems
or shortage of money that's why she bears the illness and curses
herself. She cries at her helplessness and bad luck while talking
about her illness and is always worried that if the conditions remain
as such, her family conditions would worsen. If something
happens to her there is no one to take care of her family and
while crying she will ask the doctor what kind of life is this. She
thinks it better to die or commit suicide where ever her basic
needs can't be fulfilled and there is no one to take care of her.
RUBRICS :

1. Helplessness feeling of
2.  Undertakes things, opposed to her intentions
3.. Weeping, telling of her sickness, when

Associati

———E—— eee


--- Page 85 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind ia

4 Unfortunate feels
5 Fear poverty of
6. Fear starving of
7. Fear death of, impending death of
8. Fear death of, soon that she will die
9. Delusion, starve family will ,
10. Despair, existence, about miserable
11. Delusion unfortunate she is
12. Death, desires
13. Suicidal, despair about her miserable existence

She becomes indifferent towards her family members and
the surroundings. She doesn't like anyone. She wants to perform
her activities quietly and be all alone. She doesn’t want anyone
to come closer to her. She never thinks herself to be healthy and
is pessimistic. She always thinks that she is never going to recover
and soon will wither away because of this illness.

RUBRICS :

1. Indifference, family to his

2. Aversion, husband to, children, members of family to
3. Company, aversion to, avoids the sight of people, lies with
closed eyes
Spoken, averse to being

Irritability, spoken, to when

Pessimistic

Despair, recoveryto

Delusion, sick of being

Fear, consumption of

0. Fear, death of

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

a OMNOOS

Because of her physical weakness she has lost interest in

sex. What to talk of sex, she has developed hatred towards her
‘husband. She always feels that she is being raped. So she hates
not only her husband but the whole male sex. Her problems
aggravate after having sex. She feels that she was already dead,
now her condition would worsen. She feels that she has to work
against her will and there is always a frown on her forehead.



--- Page 86 ---
Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy -

Homoeopathy and Mind

Aversion, husband to
Aversion, men to
Dullness, coition after
Ailments, sexual excesses after
Aversion, sex opposite
Confusion, coition after
. Irritability, coition after
Restlessness, coition after
Prostration of mind, coition after
10. Sadness, coition after
11. Frown, disposed to

CONAAARWN >

From the above rubrics we see that the biggest problem of
Sepia is the unwanted desire for the sex. That is why there is
uterine prolapse. Because of this undesired feeling of sex she
always has dreams of being raped. She never likes anyone to
get closer to her but she is afraid of being alone too. Generally
the patient of Sepia feels herself sexually insecure even when
alone.

Dreams, rape of

Threats of rape

Pursued for the purpose of rape
A Case : A fifty years old woman, mentally upset, has been on
medication for long. Significant in history was that in her dreams
she saw a woman and a young man who asked her that why did
she go to Sirsa (expert ‘of mental illness) after leaving them. The
dreams came at night and the woman felt that those people had
wrong intentions i.e. relating to sex and mosily urine is passed in’
bed. She was given a single dose of Sepia 30 on 9.4.99 and she
recovered within a week. She never had those dreams again.
She was taking medicines from a psychiatrist for a long time..
She had been to many charmers/exhortists. Then she was given

placebo for two months and she completely recovered. Hats off

to homoeopathy, because of which, she came to me.


--- Page 87 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Bz

ARSENIC ALBUM

IMPORTANT RUBRICS :
+  Fastidious
+ Rest cannot until things are in proper place
+ Anxiety duty as if he has not done his
+ Avarice
+ Delusion starve family will

He is very fastidious. He is very hard working and cannot
rest until the things are placed in proper place. He is avaricious
and fears that his family might die of starvation.

D.D. Nux Vomica
Nux Vomica is fastidious, there is ‘Anxiety business about’
but Nux Vomica spends. He is a boaster and spends money
through ostentation. He spends money on parties just to show
that he is a rich businessman, but he never spends money on
his family. He is estranged from the family and his entourage but
he is kind to the strangers.
RUBRICS :
+ Boaster, braggart, squanders through ostentation
+  Avarice as regards to his family, generosity towards
strangers
+ Generous and generous strangers for
+ Estranged family from his, being kind with strangers but
not with his family and his entourage

>
<=
he
pw)
Ls)
Q
oO,
o
le}
&
[e]
<=
a
£
)
he
CS. .
®
vn)
®
[a
ao)
—
S
7
=
(¢)
“”
tee
o
ne
oe
fe)
fe
i
()
le)
2)
2)
<

D.D. Pulsatilla

+  Avarice, wants all for himself (Complete Repertory)

+ Delusion ruined he will be

+ ~ Fastidious

+ Boaster, squanders through ostentation

There is no generosity in him, he wants everything for himself.
The second important point is :

In Ars Alb there is carried desire to be fast where as in Pulsatilla
there is carried desire to be slowly.



--- Page 88 ---
Sa Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

"lam not in hurry, take even more than due time, "wants to be
treated without any trouble or inconvenience.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Carried desires to be fast

+ Quieted carried only by being, rapidly

+ Rest cannot until things are in proper place
+  Fastidious

# Rocking agg.

+

Quiet wants to be
He wants to get well very fast like the patient of Belladonna.
But the patient of Ars. Alb wants to get well even faster. "Dr.
Sahib, give me some medicine which would give me instant relief."
During sickness he quite wants to be, rocking agg.

Why does he want to get well soon? Because he is
fastidious and rest cannot until things are in proper order.
+ indifference to recovery (Ars Alb, Calc Carb)

D.D. Calc Carb

There is indifference to recovery in Calc Carb and he is
very scared of pain, suffering, operations and wants to get quick
relief. He is not much bothered about the illness.
Arsenic Album

There is indifference to recovery due to fastidiousness and
carried desire to be fast.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Delusion thieves sees

+ Delusion thieves sees, night

+ Delusion thieves, house, in

+ Delusion thieves, house, in, bed is full of thieves and space

under
+ Delusion thieves, house, in, listens under the bed
~ She has delusions that her house even her bed is full of
thieves. She could even hear them talking.


--- Page 89 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Baa

Just imagine what will the patient do if he is in such a mental
state. The patient of Arsenic Alb would keep always keep the
keys in his pocket, .he will never put the keys sometime else
away from him, would never trust his children. But because he is
afraid of being alone, he would always desire to be in the
company.

RUBRICS :
Fear alone of being, lest he die
Sadness, alone when
Fear, death, alone when
Fear, death, evening in bed
_Fear, death, night
Fear, death, after midnight
Fear, sudden death of
Company, desire for
Alone agg. fear of people yet, amel in company

$4444 444

OTHER RUBRICS :
Fear, cancer of
_ Fear, unaccountable
Fear, death of sudden
Sadness, consoled cannot be
Delusion, disease incurable she has as
Weeping, child like
Anger, recovery if one spoke of her (Complete Rep.)
Despair, recovery of ;
Doubtful, recovery of, thinks it is useless to take medicine |
Walks more than she should
Eats, drinks more than she should
Carried desire to be fast _
. She is afraid that she is suffering from cancer, an incurable
disease. She will die suddenly. There is no reason for this fear.
Her fear is meaningless.

>
=
ee
=
oO
Qo.
[eo]
[ob]
°
£
[e)
els
&
=
oO
he
©
o
rn)
o
w 0
5
i=
c
oo
rs)
YW)
he
(e)
aoe
c
[@)
om
&
rs)
°
”
”
<—{

+++ H+ +++ +++ +



--- Page 90 ---
el Homoeopathy and Mind

‘Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

(Unaccountable means he knows that his fear is
meaningless yet is not able to overcome it)
He gets angry if someone talks of complete recovery. He

‘becomes sad and can't be consoled in any way. Either he says :

"It is useless to take medicine."

OR .

He wants immediate relief and goes from one doctor to the
other.

A Case : A girl child of 8 years came to me for the problem of

cough and constipation for the last three to four years. She had

very severe cough which was never better by any medicine.
During case history she told that she has too many fears

i.e. from dark, from being alone, from iniection, from lizards and

many many more. She has fear of small insects. In short she

fears from everything. It was also told that her handwriting is

also very fine. She keeps her bag and books very neat. She was

given Arsenic album 30 one dose followed by PI. Just within one

week she was free from cough from which she was suffering

from more than 3-4 years of period. All her fears also vanished.

This is an amazing case. When her mother came, she told me

that earlier whenever this girl saw any lizard in the bathroom,

she never used to take bath. She did not go to bathroom. Bui

now she has forgotten that fear also.

RUBRICS:

1) Fear of dark

2) Fear alone of being

3) Fears full of

4) Fears unaccountable

5) Fear of insects

6) Fastidious.

Since then many cases of children have been cured successfully

on the basis of fears with fastidiousness on the same pattern.


--- Page 91 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind fag
ACONITE

Aconite which was recommended earlier only in acute cases
has many rubrics which show symptoms of chronic cases. We
have got astonishing results by using them in daily practice.

MAIN RUBRICS :
Delusion disease incurable he has
Fear disease incurable of being
Fear imaginary things of
Despair recovery of
Delusion deformed some part of body i is
Inconsolable
Hopeful :
Perseverance '
Delusion, sheep driving
10. Hopeful, alternate despair
11. Despair, alternate hope
12. Light, desire for

OMNAALWN =

Do these rubrics despair alternate hope, Perseverance,
hopeful show symptoms of acute problem? No, absolutely not.

We have used them in chronic cases. Here (Light desire
for) means, the patient says, "I am taking medicines continuously
(Perseverance), | was hopeful that | would recover (Hopeful),
but Dr. Sahib why am | not improving?" (Light desire for)

Here the patient does not talk like that of Opium "I am taking
medicine from so many days or last so many months." Here the
patient fears imaginary things. He has delusions that his disease
is incurable (Delusion, disease incurable) or some parts of his
body is deformed (Delusion deformed some part of body is).
When his condition deteriorates he loses all hopes (Hopeful
alternate despair). But when his condition starts improving he
thinks that it was some minor illness (Delusion Sheep driving)
and he hopes that he will recover soon (Despair alternate hope). |
That means Hopeful alternate despair, despair alternate hope
continues. The patient perseveres and then asks the doctor, "Why

~
<=
we
~~
E31
Qo
(e)
®
(e)
E
2)
<=
c
_ b
oO
; a
Ls)
[ob
”
tet)
[0
oO
we
eer}
c .
g
[S)
v)
=
8"
f=
°
-
is
oO
©
w
ey)
<x



--- Page 92 ---
Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

tm Homoeopathy and Mind

am | not getting well?" (Light desire for).

OTHER SIMILAR RUBRICS ARE :

+ Mirth heat during (As soon as one is in good mood)
+ Cheerful heat during (warmth of joy)
+ Despair chill during (Loses joy & enthusiasm, chill siginad
OTHER RUBRICS :
1. | Death presentiment of, predicts the time of death
2. Fear suffocation of
3. Delusion sleeping while awake insists that he was
"| don't know what happened, | was sleeping, | wasn't
_” aware."
4. Contradictory to speech, intentions are .
"| didn't mean what | said."
5. Jesting aversion to, joke cannot take a
6. Music aggravates
7. Music aversion to
8.

Mildness

RUBRICS SHOWING ACUTE CONDITION

++++ +++ + 4+

Fear, death of

Delusion, die about to die he is
Death, presentiment of
Insanity, pain intolerable from
Foolish, behaviour fever during
Fear, suffocation of

Shrieking, pain from

. Anguish, pain in, spasm during

Fear death of,
anxiety with precordia about (Aconite, Plat)
Haemoptysis in - Aconite
Loquacity with
Anxiety in region of heart


--- Page 93 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind 9a

Parturition during (Aconite, Coffea, Plat)
Perspiration during acute
Pregnancy during
Predicts the time
Prolapse uteri with
+ Anguish driving from place to ain restlessness with.
+ Anguish tossing about

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Fear accidents, of.
+ Fear crossing busy street
+ Fear crowd in
In such fearful acute conditions, Aconite settles the matter
in a fine way.

>
co
hi
_
15°)
[ox
fe)
@
O.
£
oO.
<=
&
=
oO
he
oS
‘@
2)
®
om
iS)
—
Tes
c
Ae
O°.
Y)
a
lone
=
) ae
12)
=
ise
O
oO,
0)
”)
st



--- Page 94 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

NUX VOMICA
MAIN RUBRICS :
Anxiety, business about
Businessmen, worn out businessmen, suited for
Ardent
Perseverance
Ailment from honour wounded
Fear, opinion of others
Fear, get talked about of
Boaster, squanders through ostentation
Avarice, as regards his family, generosity towards strangers
Avarice, but squanders on oneself
He is very much concerned about business, ardent and
perseveres. Nux Vomica is for a worn out businessman. The
patient is very conscious of his reputation and doesn't want to be
the talk of the town. Perhaps because of this he is a boaster and
squanders through ostentation. He is generous. He is avaricious
regarding his family but squanders on himself. Another important
rubrics is that he is estranged from his family but kind with
strangers.
D.D.
Pulsatilla
There are many common rubrics with Pulsatilla
1. Fastidious
Avarice ‘
Anger answer when obliged to
Fear opinion of others
Fear get talked about
Estranged family from his, kind for strangers.
Mildness
Yielding disposition ©

4444444444

ONAHAWN

But Differentiating Points :
Pulsatilla Nux Vomica
Consolation amel. Consolation agg..


--- Page 95 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Ma

Avarice Avarice but generosity to strangers
XXX - Perseverance
XXX Ardent
XXX Injustice can not support
XXX Ambition fame for
XXX Ambition money to make
Natrum Mur
Fastidious
Anger answer when obliged to
Avarice generosity towards strangers, avarice as regards
his family
Content

Music Ameliorates
Dwelling on disappointments, past disagreeable
occurrences on, recalls disagreeable memories. —

No Anxiety business about

non + ++ +O 4+

ut in Nux Vomica

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

+. Delusion poor he is

+. Fear poverty of

+ Music Agg.

+ Anxiety business about

+ Quiet wants to be, repose and tranquillity desires

Arsenic Album

+  Fastidious

+ Avarice

+ Anger answer when obliged to

+ Rest cannot until things are in proper place

But Differentiating Points : .
Nux Vomica Arsenic Album
Avarice Avarice

. Generosity towards strangers XXX

——EEE SE ee



--- Page 96 ---
~
=
.
~
o
jo
°
feb)
°o
£
oO
ae,
1
“SK
oO
i
-
- @
¢)
oO
jad
(>)
=
=
Cc
i
oO
Y)
fe
. Oo
[va
Cc
[e]
=
&
o.
ie]
9)
SL]
<

Homoeopathy and Mind

Boaster squandering through XXX

ostentation.
XXX Carried desire to be fast
XXX : Rest cannot until things are

in proper place

OTHER RUBRICS :

$+oooe

Loquacity health about his

Anxiety health about

Anxiety hypochondriacal, mania to read medical books
Carefulness

Cautious

Talks anxious about his condition

He is anxious about his health. He is very fdgierdul about

matters regarding health, how to keep good health. He is
hypochondriacal and has a mania to read books, newspapers,
magazines regarding health. He is very conscious about his diet.

+++ +++

Complaining, disease of sensitive ailment to the most trifling
Complaining, pain of

Impatience, coryza with

Lamenting, sickness about her

Trifles, Seem important -

Lamenting, pain about

He will go on complaining of disease, of trifles. He will show

impatience even if he has caught only cold.

+

Intolerance, complaints of his,
intolerance of complaint is very useful in acute conditions

where he cannot tolerate the problem (Singular).

OTHER RUBRICS :

Al.
2.
3.

Reading aversion to (Nux Vomica & Pulsatilla)
Kleptomania (Nux Vomica & Pulsatilla)]

Lair, lies, never speaks the truth, does not know what she
is saying (Nux Vomica)


--- Page 97 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind RZ

A Case : Acase of a girl of 8th standard who was not interested
in studies. She was very fond of games. Her father told us that
she was a kleptomaniac. She was also an out and out liar. By
chance the mind section of Synthesis Repertory recommends
Nux Vomica in all the three cases. A dose of Nux Vomica 30 was .
given and she improved every week. She passed with good
marks. She started caring about her studies.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ A/F death parents or friends, of

+ Unconscious, answers correctly when spoken to but delirium
and unconsciousness return at once

A Case : A case of a widow. | was giving her Ignatia. One day
she came to me in hysterical condition. Her eyes had turned
upward but when | called her, she answered correctly and then
fell unconscious. When | matched ‘ailment from death of husband!
and ‘Unconscious’ rubric, it came out only Nux Vomica. A single
dose Nux Vomica 30 was given and the patient is OK till now.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Mischievous

+ Teasing

+ Liar never speaks the truth, does not know what she is
saying

+ Delusion strike, like to strike he would anyone who spoke

to him, in the face of

A Case : A very mischievous boy of 10 years. He found happiness
in teasing others. He was an out and out a liar. He was very short
tempered and struck anyone who tried to talk to him. He was
cured with Nux Vomica 30/1dose.

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Frightened trifles at, wakes in a fright from least noise.

.
&


--- Page 98 ---
i Homoeopathy and Mind’

+ Blood wounds can not see at

A Case : A patient of 30 years, used to wake up at slight noises.
He used to get frightened at least trifles. One thing was strange.

.in him that he could see fights or even himself could fight but
couldn't see blood gushing forth from the wounds either in fights
or in an accident. He used to become nervous. He recovered
with Nux Vomica 30.

OTHER RUBRICS :
Delusion, strike like to, strike he would anyone who spoke
to him, in the face (Always ready for a fight)
Fight, wants to
Quarrelsome, disturbed if
Anger, interruption from
Delusion, insulted he is
Delusion, wrong, goes wrong OP sea
Dipsomania  —
hypochondriasis with»
Irritability with
get up at night to drink, must
+ Noise
frightened awakens in a fright from least noise
sensitive noise to painful sensitiveness
| + Suicidal disposition
talks always of suicide but doesn't commit
but lacks courage
Benevolence
Charitable (Complete Repertory)
Delusion injury in about to receive
Delusion laughed at,
( mocked at being
Delusion sick, work and for this reason will not
Sit inclination to ~
" Extroverted

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy
+¢++++++ +

+s SF F 4+



--- Page 99 ---
++ +++ +++ +

+++

Homoeopathy and Mind H@

Optimistic
Positiveness
Coquettish too much
Obscene talk
Frown disposed to
Hatred and revengeful
Hurry
always in, everybody moves too slowly,
movements in, cannot do things fast enough
Insanity makes purchases useless
Jealousy
gentle husband becoming brutal from jealousy
driving to striking his wife
impotence with
Suspicious, afternoon
Striking, abusive drunkenness during
Kill desire to
offence, sudden impulse to for a slight
beloved ones
throw child into fire sudden impute to

>
<=
=
prev]
is)
Q
fe)
®
5
x
a
E =
o
BS
C5]
@
o
®
Y
[S)
g
=
c
9
©.
Ww
be
2)
Noe.
=
fe)
-
Ss
oO
°
”)
2)
bg


--- Page 100 ---
7 Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

CHAMOMILA

MAIN RUBRICS :

HF HHH HHH HHH HHH HH 64444

Quieted carried only by being (Cham, Arsenic Album)
Weeping, carried, child is quieted only when
Restlessness children in, amel. by being carried
Rocking amel, desire for being rocked .

Morose children in, carried desire to be |

(Benz. Acid, Cham)

Tranquillity, Calmness, carried on arm only when (CR)
Abusive, Insulting parents

Anger throws things away

Anger touched when

Answers snappishly

Consolation kind words agg

Answer civil cannot —

Fear touch of

Kicks, stiffs and kicks when carried

Rudeness naughty children of

Rocking and desire to be rocked

Striking children in

_ Throws things away

Touched aversion to being

Weeping touched when

Capricious, longing for things which are rejected when
offered.

Many rubrics are similar to that of Cina. Few of them are different
like ‘Answers snappishly, Answer civil cannot, Abusive, Insulting
parents’ and the main difference is that a patient of Chamomila
stops crying when being rocked or carried.

ANOTHER SET OF RUBRICS :

1.
2.
3.

Discontented with everything
impatience slowly everything goes too
Fastidious



--- Page 101 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Bi

He is discontented with whatever the other does. He is very
fastidious, impatient and restless. It seems to him that things are
moving very slowly. (For example most of the mother-in-laws
feel like this).

patrhy

FEW OTHER ASSOCIATED RUBRICS ARE :

1. Dwells on past disagreeable occurrences cannot cease

talking about oid vexations.

Moaning offences happened long ago, for trifling

Speech vexation about old

Weeping, offence, imaginary, at least

Ailment from hanour wounded

Anger consoled when

Anger touched when

Delusion vexations and offences of

Dictatorial

10. Grief offences from long past

11. Hatred and revengeful

12. Offended easily takes everything in bad part

_ 13. Offended offences from past

_ 14. Delusion insulted he is

_ 15. Weeping offences from
16. Weeping touched when

He dwells on disagreeable past occurrences. He moans,

cries, suffers on trifles. He gets angry and cries whenever he is
touched (Anger and Weeping touched). If someone tries to
sympathise, he gets angry. He feels that he has been insulted
and carries feelings of anger, hatred, revenge in his heart.

&

WONDAARWN

te)
®.
£:
0
<
os
my
ro)
ha
G
®
”
®
oO
rs)
2
=|
=
{2
rr)
WY)
ta
)
ee
c
)
2
n)
)
)
a
v)
<

PAIN OF CHAMOMILLA :
Impatience pain from
Anger pains about
Excitement, pain during
Lamenting, pain about
Rage, pain from
Shrieking, pain with
Shrieking, obstinate

ieee ee

NOORWN>=


--- Page 102 ---
4@ Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

|

iy

8. Violent, pain from
9. Weeping, pains with

He is getting impatient, angry, complaining, dhricking: crying
with pain.

OTHER ASSOCIATED RUBRICS :

ae» =

Impatience, slowly everything goes too

Answer civil cannot

Quieted carried only by being

Rocking ameliorates

Impatience, cure him at once the patient insists that the
doctor.

ANOTHER ASPECTS OF CHAMONMILA :

Reser Sy =

Anger interruption from

Intolerance interruption of

Talk indisposed to, obstinate from

Weeping obstinate

Anger spoken to when

Irritability questioned when

Irritability spoken to when

Irritability sends the doctor-home, says he is not sick
Moral feeling want of

Well says he is well when very sick -

Spoken averse to being.

Spoken aggravation (or addressed) when spoken to
He is obstinate, won't talk to anyone and gets angry if

spoken to. He will get angry and tell the doctor to go away as
nothing has happened to:him. Because talking aggravates him,
he has no morals. Intolerance spoken to being is the singular
feature.

FEW DELUSIONS ARE:

iv |

3.

Delusion voices hears absent persons of
Delusion voices hears, strangers of
Delusion voices hears, night


--- Page 103 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Hi

4. Delusion voices hears, absent people of night, cannot sleep..

OTHER RUBRICS :

Anxiety coffee after

Sensitive coffee to

Change desire for

Morose, children in, carried desire to be
Music agg.

Music aversion to

Music, earache from music

++++ ++ +

~~ .
=
hon
~~

©
xi
ie)
1)
xe)
£
ie)
a .
£
=
fe)
fame

o]
@
m7)
@
a
oO.
=
=
<
2
Q
o-
Abi
o
Ge

c
)
s
is
5)
s)
Ww) b
vn
<{



--- Page 104 ---
6m Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

: CINA
Earlier this medicine was recommended only to kill worms.
Now when mind symptoms were applied, it given wonderful
results.

MAIN RUBRICS :

Quieted cannot be

Refuses help (singular)

Indifference to caresses

Caresses averse to being

Anger throws things away

Striking children in

Weeping, children in, will is not done, when (singular)
Rudeness, naughty children, of

Desires full of, numerous various things

Capriciousness longing for things which are rejected when
offered
Contrary

Obstinate children

Weeping touched when

A stubborn child who throws the things in rage. He desires
many things but when that thing is offered, he refuses to take
because he doesn't know what to take. He is obstinate. He is
very dry, very naughty and cries when his desires are not fulfilled.
He doesn't need any kind of heip and slips out of lap. These
symptoms can be seen in other medicines too but there are other
rubrics which help in making the distinction : this child can not
be quietened in anyway. Caressing does not help. He will
say, "| don't need it." That means he refuses every kind of
help. ,

$+ 444444444

OTHER RUBRICS:
+ Quieted cannot be, petting & caressing are of no use
(Complete Repertory)


--- Page 105 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

$4444 +44 $4444

+ Refuses help Fy
+ Weeping children in, will is not done, if =
°

OTHER RUBRICS : °
Kicks, stiff when carried, becomes 5
Anger worm affection in =x
Fear children cannot bear to have anyone come nearthem [B=
Jesting aversion to S
Weeping sad thoughts at i
Irritability looked at, spoken or touched id

Play aversion to, indisposition to, in children day time 4
(Only Cina in Complete Repertory) io
Touched aversion to being 534

_ Stranger, presence of strangers agg By
Company, aversion to, the presence of strangers uv)
Weeping carried, child cries piteously if taken hold of 2
Carried desire to be shoulder over S

_ Irritability rocking fast ameliorates es
Weeping sad thoughts at ‘ns
Weeping touched when (Mentally any ipugttt orany word [ir
heard will move the mind). Be

D.D.

Cina:

+ Refuses help

+ Quieted cannot be

Stramonium :
+ Delirium crying for help
+ —Clinging to person, furniture etc.

Chamomilla :
+ Quieted carried only by being



--- Page 106 ---
Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Homoeopathy and Mind

TARENTULA HIS

MAIN RUBRICS: ©

Music ameliorates, music amel. restlessness of extremities
Hysteria, music ameliorates

Sensitive, noise to, music ameliorates

Singing, hoarse until very and exhausted

Singing, dancing and weeping

Dancing, wild

Listening to songs, singing songs and dancing are three
very important features. This patient starts dancing as soon as
the music comes. This madness can be seen in children and
youngsters even to the extent of dancing wild.

OARWN >

OTHER RUBRICS :

Mania abuses everyone

Anger contradiction from

Anger throws things away

Complaining and threatening
Destructiveness, clothes of

Insanity threatens destruction and death
Kicks

Mania, destruction, followed by laughter and apolagies of
Pull, one's hair desire to

Striking, his friends from anger

Striking, himself ,

Striking, her head with her hands

Striking, her body and others

Tear things, hair her and pressed her head
Threatens, destroy threatens to, kill threatens to
Touched aversion to being

Weeping consolation agg.

Weeping from consolation

Weeping, refused when anything

Feigning sick, paroxysms, faintness

HH 4444 4444444444444



--- Page 107 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

Just see that all the symptoms of madness can be found
here. He throws the things away in rage, destroys them. There is
a desire to pull his own hair, to hit his own head, to tear his clothes
and he threatens to kill and destroy everything.

1. Mania destructive efforts, sudden fox like, requiring utmost
vigilance followed by laughter and apologies (Complete Rep.).
2. Weeping, suddenly sprang away from attendants and swept
away everything from mantelpiece, said she was sorry but could
not help it (Complete Rep.).

RUBRICS RELATED TO SEX IN YOUNGSTER OF ANY AGE :
Mania sexual mania in men/in women
Nymphomania, coition aggravates
Irritability, coition amel. after
Hysteria, lascivious
Sadness sexua! excitement after
_Shamelessness, exposes the person

+++++4

RUBRICS WHEN THE YOUNGSTERS ARE DISAPPOINTED
IN LOVE : '

+ Ailments from, love disappointed unhappy love

+ = Insanity, love from disappointed (Singular)

OTHER RUBRICS : ‘
# Runs about
+  Restlessness, anxious, compelling rapid walking
+ Hurry, haste
everybody must hurry
movements in
walking while
+ Insanity, restlessness of legs, with
He is very restless, impatient, energetic and runs here and there

OTHER RUBRICS :
# Anguish, lamenting, moaning

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy


--- Page 108 ---
Mae Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

+ Answer questioned, does not answer, when
+ Understands, questions addressed to her, does not
+ Light shuns

He is lamenting, moaning in anguish means Hai, Hai, Hai.
He goes on making complaints without listening to you. He will
not even answer your questions. He will like to go to Tantriks
instead going for tests.

By this medicine many cases of mania and hysteria have been
cured, especially when the boys or girls have sex related
problems. They love music and dance on the verge of insanity.

A TYPICAL MENTAL CASE : A mental boy of sixteen years,
studying in 10th standard was brought. We were told that in his
cousin's marriage, he got drunk. He was given electric shocks
from psychiatrist in Dhanuala and is still on medicine. His

symptoms were :
1. | We wanders all day but quietens at night
2. He says

- |am Baba Nanak, | am son of the tenth guru.

- This telephone exchange in the village established
because of my power.

- There are so many girls who want to love me and are
behind me

- One day he threw the papers at the teacher's face.

- He strikes even-his parents.

- He abuses everyone.

- He breaks the things, throws them and then apologises.

- Enjoys music, dances wildly and then quietens.

- The wedding which he had gone to attend, says that half
of his friend's things are his own even his wife.

- His father and uncle told that all his friends have got
married.

- He thinks that he is under the influence of some evil spirit
so should be taken to some baba.

He got well with a single dose of Tarentula H. 30 followed by PL



--- Page 109 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

A Case : A girl of 14 years was brought to me at 10 p.m. She
was brought in a car and was carried by two people. She was
unable to speak. She was sighing heavily and throwing away her
legs. Her mother told that she had lost her voice since afternoon.
| asked her name but she did not answer. | sent everyone out of
the room. Only her mother was allowed to stay. | asked her mother
to make the girl stand and leave. | knew that if it was the case of
Hysteria, she wouldn't fall or would fall in such a way so as not to
hurt herself. Her mother was very scared. | made her stand. She
wavered a little but did not fall. | enquired something from her
mother. | saw that she was a girl with short hair and wearing
jeans though from a very ordinary family. On enquiry, the mother
‘told that she was very fond of music and dancing. A single dose
of Tarentula H 30 was given. Within five minutes she spoke, told
her name and quietly went away and another day came on her
own to take more medicine and continued on PL for 1 month.

bY
=
hon
+
oe .
foe
(eo)
®
fe)
=
()
as
&
d=
is
i")
(ot)
7)
®
02
2
tonal
Ss
&
fee
2
1c
Lo”
[a
}:
2)
a7)
ioe


--- Page 110 ---
\

i Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

LYSSIN

The medicine prepared from the saliva of a rabied dog,
produces symptoms of madness. Let us carefully read the
following rubrics before understanding this medicine completely.

MAIN RUBRICS :

Delusion happen, something terrible is going to

Delusion injure injured, is being

Delusion, wrong, suffered, has

Delusion, nothing he could do

Fear, happen, something terrible will

In all the above rubrics anger, rage, desire to bite, strike,
kill is common.

According to Dr. Rajan Shankran, the patient of Lyssin is
overwhelmed by 'the feeling of being tormented’. The patient
behaves in a same way as a dog, who if irritated repeatedly,
becomes ready to bite everyone. The patient feels that he has
been tortured by those people on whom he is dependent. His
patience has run. Being tortured like this, his anger turns to
violence.

'’ He has mercurial temperament. He feels sorry afterwards
and repents. Why? Because he is dependent on them with whom
he is feeling angry.

+ Delusion tormented (By those upon whom she is dependant)
+ Delusion abused being

+ Anger alternating with repentance quick

+ Rage, repentance, followed by

+ = Anger violent

+ Attack others, desire to

+ Bite, desire to

+ Cut, mutilate, spit others

+ = Impulse to kill

+ Impulse, stab his flesh with the knife he holds, to
+ Violence

+

+

+

+

+



--- Page 111 ---
> UU

Homoeopathy and Mind He

+ Delusion being tormented by those upon whom she is
dependant
+ Anger alternate quick repentance
+ Rage alternate quick repentance ;
Rage, anger, violence, bite, kill are closely associated with
such patients. :

A Case : Here | remember a very special case where a patient
suffering from illness for the last fifteen years was cured by a
single dose of Lyssin 30. A girl of 25 years had the habit of
plucking her hair for the last 15 years. She had made her scalp
bald by plucking her hair and she used a wig. She had taken
medicines from several places but had got no relief. But can you
believe that this patient recovered from a single dose of Lyssin.
Yes, this is the reality. On 18.8.96, this girl told me about her
mental state, that she developed this habit when she was in fourth
standard and her mother had suffered heart attack. She had to
do all the house hold chores but her family instead of loving her,
always nagged about her work, they criticized her. This thing
affected her so deeply that she developed the habit of plucking
her hair. | applied this rubric 'Delusion being tormented by those
upon whom she is dependant’ because at that time she was
dependant on her parents and she had violent anger followed by
quick repentance, or desire to bite the person who irritated her. |
gave one dose of Lyssin-30 and since then five years had passed
since then and the girl has not plucked even a single hair. Very
soon small hair grew on her scalp with in few days. Within two
months her head was covered with hair and she stopped making
use of wig.

Let us continue few more rubrics of Lyssin :

Dr. Rajan Shankran writes that the patient of Lyssin will
bear something to some extent if the roof is leaking. But if it
doesn't stop, then he will pick up a hammer and break the plaster.
But he will soon regret and as the anger cools down, he will start
repairing the roof again. '

In rage, he has a desire to stab himself, if he has a knife in

>
&
he
prer]
w
a
fo)
@
fe)
€
fe)
<
&
=
o
=
wo
feb)
2)
®
~
oO
[Yon
ar}
c
o
oO
ep) 5
te
2
=
°
yw
5
oO
[e)
7)
2)
<<


--- Page 112 ---
>
=
ho
—
©
Q.
fe)
_o
fe)
=
(e)
<=
I
Fron
oO
| =
©
ca)
mH)
x)
[0
a)
=
=
=
we
Oo
”
fee
2
c
Ke)
Pn]
ae
no
9
“Oa
rt)
2

$4447

his hand.

+ Impulse, stab his flesh with the knife he holds, to

+ Kill, desire to

+ — Injure with a knife, impulse to throw child into fire, “sudden
impulse to

+ Delusion wrong, suffered has

D.D.
Few medicines that are closer to Lyssin are Sulphur, Crocus
Sativa, Staphysagria, China etc.
Sulphur :
Anger alternating with quick repentance
Irritability, remorse with easy and quick
Remorse, quickly repents
Amusement averse to
Music aggravates
Music, palpitation when listening to music
Sulphur is alone in number irritability, remorse easy and

quick, where anger is followed by quick repentance. He is averse

to watching TV, or listening to songs. It makes him feel restless
and he has ae on listening to music.

2. Crocus Sativa :

It is similar to Lyssin in ‘Anger itary with quick
repentance’. But here -he likes music very much. He is jolly and
cheerful natured person. For which we have following rubrics :
+ Cheerful music from (Singular)

+ Music ameliorates
+ — Singing involuntarily, on hearing a single note sung (Singular)
+ Memory active music from (Singular)

OTHER RUBRICS OF CROCUS SATIVA: |

+ Anger alternating with laughing with burst of
+  Quarrelsome alternating with singing

+ Kisses everyone .- 7


--- Page 113 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind M3

+ Loquacity, witty

+ Violent alternating with mildness

+ Rage alternating with affectionate disposition
3. Oleander:

This medicine has following rubric common with Lyssin.
+ = Anger alternate with quick repentance
Other rubrics of oleander are:
+ Confusion of mind, reading while; understand, if he attempts
to (Singular)
+ Rage contradiction from
+ Plans making many
+ ODreamasifina
future about the; poetical future; about a.(Singular)

>

Stramonium :

Here the desire to escape is from the outsiders and not the
family members. Instead he clings to the persons nearer opposite
to Lyssin. That is why the following rubrics come.

+ . Escape attempts to

+ — Clinging to persons, furniture etc. (whereas in Lyssin he is
tormented by someone nearer & familiar).

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

5. China: ‘
It is common to Lyssin in :
+ Delusion tormented he is
Here there is no rage or violence of Lyssin, and no anger
alternating with repentance quick. But other rubrics are :
+ Delusion unfortunate he is

+ Delusion work hindered at



--- Page 114 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind
CHINA

MAIN RUBRICS .

+ Delusion tormented he is
+ Delusion unfortunate he is
+ Delusion work hindered at

‘ ACase: A chronic case of psoriasis from 35 years was cured by

_ asingle dose of China 30 where a feeling of tormented by mother
inlaw was found. She was oversensitive to noise and had many
fears due to her sensitive nature.

IMPORTANT RUBRICS :

+ Delusion tormented she is
+ Delusion deserted she is

+ Delusion unfortunate she is

OTHER RUBRICS:.
Conscientious about trifles
Anger trifles at

Anxiety trifles about
Intolerance of noise
Sensitive to noise
Sensitive to pain

Sensitive to pain

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

DH ¢44+9¢444

UBRICS RELATING TO FEARS
Fear suffering of

Fear evil of

Fear hurt of

Fear pitied of being

Fear falling of

4$+4+44

NIGHT AGGARAVATIONS OF CHINA :
* Fear night. :

ee ee |


--- Page 115 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

Anxiety night, mid night

Restless night, bed during tossing about .
Weeping night

Theorizing night

Restlessness, night sleeplessness from
Restlessness< night bed during at

Horrible things, sad stories affect her profoundly

+++ ++ +

OTHER IMPORTANT RUBRICS:
+ Delusion obstructed being
+ Delusion work hindered at

A Case : | have applied successfully the above set of rubrics.
Once |! had block up feeling (obstruted) in my throat due to
indigestion and was not able to see the patients. Dr. Mann gave
me China 30 one dose on the basis of these rubrics. It worked
wonderfully and within few minutes the choked and blocked
feeling was all gone. | applied this set in many cases and never
failed.

>.
=
tes,
_
|
a.
a)
®
Re)
of
[e]
a5
EE
=
O
few
&
72)
®
of
aS
=
Ss.
i=
2
oO
W”)
tm
2
c
2
in!
fa.
o
[e)
”
2)
<



--- Page 116 ---
~
<=
ho
we
&
2.
fe)
®
°
=
i2)
a
£
<=
a)
ihe
&
®
4)
o
~.
oO
+S
peas
a
os
oO
ip)
. tm
i
ec
AS
c=]
me
o
: 2
v2)
”
<q

Homoeopathy and Mind

PETROLEUM

MAIN RUBRICS :

1. Cowardice, opinion, without courage to express her own
2. Excitement, trembling, inward

3.  Helplessness feeling of

4. Yielding disposition

Case : Smt. Hardish Kaur, age 30 years, "| don't say her anything.
If | say something to her, she will get angry. So it is better to be
quiet. My body trembles in rage, but | don't have the courage to
say anything.”

Case : Smt. Nirmla Devi, age 25 years says, "I don't express my
anger. If | say something, | become anxious. | am unable to speak

. anything, | can not put up my opinion, | am dependent on them

“er they will throw me out."

Case : Smt. Ranjit Kaur, age 32 years, “| am unable to express
anything, so | prefer to remain quiet. If | say something | start
feeling restlessness. My husband is short tempered or moody, |
have a fear from him."

OTHER RUBRICS :

Another rubric which was applied in the case of a child.
+ Wildness, children in (Only Petroleum)

Avery hot tempered child, very unpredictable and wil¢. He
was cured with this medicine.


--- Page 117 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Bz

LYCOPODIUM
IMPORTANT RUBRICS :
Mildness
Yielding disposition
Helplessness feeling of
Cowardice
Anger, absent persons at
In all these rubrics, Lycopodium alone works. Its, similar
rubrics (1) Yielding disposition (2) Heiplessness feeling is closer
to Pulsatilla and Cocculus but there is one distinction. In
Lycopodium, the feeling of helplessness is ‘must'. On the basis
of these rubrics, those cases have been treated where Cocculus
or Pulsatilla were given instead.

+$+++4

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Quarrel aversion to
2. Cowardice
3. Hard for inferiors, kind for superiors
4. Estranged family; from his, being kind with strangers but
not with his entourage and his family

5.  Dictatorial, dominating

’ Here we have solved those cases where the patient quarrels
at home, with youngsters but is a coward outside. He is very
gentle for outsiders but not towards his family. He is a very nice
person in the opinion of others: .

Among the children, the child beats the youngsters (Rubric:
Rage striking with) but is a coward outside or he poses to be
brave in front of inferiors. He is dominating and dictatorial,
intelligent and there is an inward desire to study. He has a stage
fright, can't talk in public, starts trembling in the beginning but if
reaches at the stage, he performs the best.

+  Timidity, talk in public to, yet capable to (only Lyco)

Association for Scientific Research in Hofnoeopatrhy

OTHER-RUBRICS : a
+ Fear ghosts of; evening, night

2


--- Page 118 ---
| Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in. Homoeopatrhy

+ Fear dark of
+. Fearroom, on entering the room

The children are afraid of darkness. There is fear in entering
the room in the evening or at night. When asked why, they will
answer that they are scared of ghosts. (Earlier such cases we
used to give Stramonium.)

D.D.
Stramonium : In stramonium, there is no fear of ghosts at night.
He fears darkness and feels that he is certainly followed by ghosts.

IMPORTANT RUBRIC :
+ Delusion, pursued, ghosts, by

Many cases have been solved by this set. Need is only to
using this technique and not get hooked by drug pictures.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Boaster, rich wishes to be considered

Power, love of

Ambition money to make

Ambition, means employed; every possible

Dictatoria!, dominating

Hard for inferiors, kind for superiors

There is love for power and chair. He is a boaster and want
to be considered rich. He can use any means to achieve her
goals. He is dictatorial and dominating for weak people, but flatters
the powerful.

Aakwna

A Case : A girl suffering from some problem with confusion while
studying or reading, difficult concentration and skin eruptions,
improved with this medicine. She was unable to use her brain.
She had the feeling of being estranged by her family members
because she was brought up by her uncle and aunt. Her father
had died when she was in the womb of her mother and her mother
left her with her uncle and aunt. She passed a very difficult
childhood. She was given medicine on the basis of being


--- Page 119 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

estranged, along with other rubrics.

FOLLOWING RUBRICS WERE CONSIDERED:

+ Estranged family from his, being kind with strangers but
not kind with his family and entourage
(No delusion alone, No feeling of isolation)

Forsaken beloved by his parents, wife-feels of not being
Confusion daily affairs about (Singular)
, Confusion from mental exertion while reading.
Concentration difficult, aversion to
while calculating
studying reading while
_ Helplessness feeling of
Laughing involuntarily yet joyless (Singular)
A/F Abused being
Delusion unfortunate she is
Unfortunate feels
Quarrel, aversion to
Coward

++ oe +H +H HHH HH +

After this case this theme of ‘being estranged’ was applied in
many cases and got wonderful results.

>
<=
he
hes
ts)
jo}
f°)
oO
(2)
ie
2)
as
&
=
+)
fee
&
®
2)
®
ac
O°
ih wal
[=
[)
es)
i
(2)
te
c
fe]
g
&
_o
°
7)
”
<



--- Page 120 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

ALUMINA

MAIN RUBRICS :

1. Fear accidents of, fatal accident, as if threatened by some
(Only Alumina)

2. Delusion accident, threatened with an accident, he was,

fatal accident (Only Alumina)

A Case : Shinder Pal Kaur, age 35 years, on giving her case
history, told one thing very important, "While driving scooter, if
someone comes towards me, either | stop or | drive scooter at a
very slow speed because of fear of some accident." Alumina
was given. Not only her other problems recovered but she lost
the fear of accident. Earlier she had never driven a scooter at a
speed more than 30 km, after taking the medicine she was driving
at 60 km without any fear.

A Case : Jasbir Kaur, age 40 years. After taking the case for
long | was told, "My two brothers and mother died in an accident.
Though | have a scooter but | never drive, or | ride only forcibly.
| know that I can drive perfectly well but | am scared of accidents.’
A dose of Alumina 30 was given on 1.3.99 and on 2.5.99 she is
not at all scared of driving a scooter.

A Case : Mr. Singh, age 35 years. He himself was a scooter
mechanic, would repair the scooter, start it, but would never ride

it. He was scared of death, while driving, in an accident. With

one dose of Alumina 30 he started driving everywhere.

A Case : An old man of 60, tiving in a village near Dhuri. But he
used to stay in his house and never come to Dhuri because of
fear that he might be hit by a scooter, car or a bus.
+ Fear accidents, fatal accident
* Bed, remain in, desire to

He recovered with Alumina and now he goes to bazaar
comfortably.


--- Page 121 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind Ha

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Fear room on entering
2. Fearrobbers
3. Delusion thieves sees

The patient is afraid of entering the room. When asked
what he is afraid of, why he doesn't enter the room, the reply is,
"lam scared of thieves and robbers."

D.D.
Lycopodium

There is only one difference in medicine, here the child is
afraid of entering the room because of his fear of ghosts but in
Alumina there is fear of robber.

_ OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Despair of recovery
2. Objective reasonable
3. Occupation diversion ameliorates
The patient feels that he is not going to recover. He will tell
the cause as such, “Dr. Sahib, | have taken so and so medicine
for the last so many months but ! have not improved." So he
feels that he is not going to recover. If he is occupied then he
feels alright otherwise he is always concerned about his health. :
He has reasons to think that he would not be alright. -
(Objective reasonable):
D.D.
Calc Carb
1. Despair of recovery
2. Occupation diversion ameliorates
3. Light desire for
The patient says, "I feel | am not going to recover. If |! am
occupied then | am happy, otherwise | am always concerned
about my heaith. If there is any need for X-ray, ultrasound etc. so
as to know the cause of illness." (Light desire for)

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy


--- Page 122 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind

OTHER RUBRICS : ;
1. Delusion talking, someone else is talking, when he speaks.
2. Confusion, identity, as to his

In cases of hysterical girls where she says that she is not
speaking, rather some dead aunt is talking in her . This medicine
is very effective in such hysterical cases.

=
oe
—
oe)
o
7 Q
n°)
®
°
nes
oO
pa
<=
©
Bam
Ls}
o
”)
®
a
ne
Senne
a)
eng
bee)
oO
wv)
—
2
c
o
=
oO
fe)
Ww
; ”
a= 6



--- Page 123 ---
J

Homoeopathy and Mind 98,

STAPHISAGRIA

MAIN RUBRICS :

A/F Anger, suppressed anger

Ailment from indignation

Fear, rage to fly into a

Fear, self control, of losing

Yielding disposition

He suppresses anger, though feels indignation but swallows
his anger, he thinks what would others say about him

APRON =

IMPORTANT RUBRICS :
+ Sensitive, opinion of others to (Synthesis Ed. 7) -
+ — Ailmentfrom mortification, indignation with (Only Staphisagria)
+  Ailment from honour, wounded |
If the problem arises due to insults done to him, this

‘medicine is very effective. The patients who were completely

mentally upset with this cause, have even recovered.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Anger throws things away

+ Throws things, person at, offend who (Only Staph).
+ - Anger never (Only Staph)

He feels angry. There is one stage in Staphysagria that
anger is suppressed but there is another stage where the things
are thrown at people who have offended him. Throws things away
is very much applicable in children, if the child is intelligent, diligent
i.e. doing study at its own. On the other side there is only one
medicine in ‘Anger Never’ i.e. Staphysagria -. again due
to the need to suppress it.

A Case: An officer of 52 years, got an appointment on phone
but came late. He enquired about the whereabouts of the doctor.
He was told that doctor has left after waiting for. him. He asked
us to call for the doctor from where-ever he has gone, since he
has something very important to discuss. He was asked many

—
ae
=
~
a5)
Q
e)
o
le)
=
eo)
fe
©
(kes
Oo
peat
[3°]
®
iz)
®
[ag
[S)
=
c
@
iS)
ep)
_
°
—
c
°
Po
&
oO
°
is =
<



--- Page 124 ---
a Homoeopathy and Mind

2)
<=
i
~~
[4°]
Q.
ioe
[)
_o
E
[°)
a
£
x=
[S)
in
U3]
[<})
n
o
oO
Oo
=
=
=a
2
o
WY
a
a?)
ow
c:
°
~
cs
Oo
[o)
”)
”
zt

times about his problem for which he came to take medicine. But
he said that he would tell the doctor only and take medicine from
him alone. Somehow doctor was traced and requested to come
back. The patient very indignantly and remorsefully took out a
paper bag from his pocket, opened it and showed something
and asked what it was. When the small bag was unwrapped,
there were white lice of skin. He was ashamed to listen to this.
He said that his body was full of such lice. He took bath daily,
was very careful about cleanliness, then how could this happen
to him. At that time his face was full of remorse and humiliation.
he was told not to worry as he will recover with this medicine. We
gave him a dose of Staphysagria 30: On the third day we got a
phone call that all his lice had disappeared.

When he was asked more about his nature, he said, "| am
hot tempered and | throw away whatever comes in my hand."
RUBRICS :

1. A/F mortification, indignation with
2. Anger throws things away.


--- Page 125 ---
————

—

Homoeopathy and Mind

LACHESIS
MAIN RUBRICS : :
Frivolous
Amusement desire for
Playful
Reading, aversion to read
Travel, desire to
Wander, desire to

OaOhwn =

A Case : A boy with premature grey hair, age 16 years was given
one dose of Lachesis 30/1 was given on 3.2.98 and PL for one
month. After two years he reported that he got well within a month
and his grey hair turned black. Again few of them have grown
grey on the basis of above rubrics, one dose of Lachesis 30/1
was given on 10.1.2000 and PL for one month. | was reported
that his grey hair turned black once again.

These rubrics has been applied in other cases too, and
has given wonderful results :

OTHER RUBRICS :

1. Jesting, fun of somebody, making

2. Duty, no sense of duty

3. Play desire to dirty tricks on others or their teachers, school
boys

OTHER RUBRICS :

Bed, aversion to, shuns bed

Sitting aversion to

Complaining trifles of, disease of

Lamenting, pain about, sickness, about his

Tormenting those about him

Orderly manner, cannot perform anything, in

He has aversion to bed. He gets restless on sitting. He
goes on complaining about his illness (even trifles). He goes on
troubling others but does not remain in bed (Arg Nit has lamenting

Pos oh =

>
=
ths
rer)
o
Q.
°
®
°
£
ie)
=
i
o
les
©
®
”
a
[ag
)
=
p=}
co
2
)
”
ten
Ao)
c
Q
al
‘3
oO
fe)
-.
”)


--- Page 126 ---
Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Homoeopathy and Mind

disease about but likes to remain in bed). He can't keep things in
orderly manner. He can't perform work in orderly manner.

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Despair of recovery
2. Delusion wrong has suffered
3. Objective reasonable
4. Refuses to take the medicine
He is despaired regarding his recovery. "| am not going to
recover. | am not going to take this medicine. Your medicine has
aggravated my condition."

A Case : A boy of 10 years, suffering skin disease after taking
medicine for 15 days started saying, "| am not going to take
these small pills. This has only aggravated my problem." That
means :
+ Delusion wrong has suffered
+ Refuses to take the medicine
Then there are two medicines :
1. | Hyoscyamus
2. _Lachesis

Further enquiry was made that how much questions he
puts and I was told that the child was very inquisitive.
For inquisitive, again there are these two medicines :
1. Hyoscyamus
2. _Lachesis

On further enquiry | was told that he is not scared of
injections and never lies quietly in bed. He is always restless
(Here Hyoscyamus is left because in Hyoscyamus there is 'Fear
injured of being’ and 'Bed remain in desire to’). The boy recovered
with Lachesis 30/1 and next week he came on his own to take
the medicine.

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Sociability
2. Foppish


--- Page 127 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

3. - Travel desire to

4. Wander desire to

5. Amusement desire for
6. Loquacity

7. Jesting

8.

Boaster, rich, wishes to be considered
He is very social, boaster, jester and wanderer. He is foppish
and always desires to be considered rich.

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Delusion die, he was about to

time has come to; help her off and wishes someone would
2. Delusion disease incurable, has

The patient says, "My illness is incurable, | am going to die soon.
My time has come | will die soon. | want to live.”

OTHER RUBRICS :

Delusion charmed and cannot break the spell

Delusion influence is under a powerful

.Delusion superhuman control, is under

Delusion voices hear that he must follow

Delusion person other, she is some

Delusion visions has, real visions are

Delusion spectres, spirits, ghosts sees r

He has this fear in his mind that he is under some spell
which he cannot break. He is under the influence of some power.
He has delusions that he hears the voices and he is compelled
to follow. He feels that he is no ‘he’ but someone else. He sees
ghosts and spectres and he thinks that they are real.

NOOSWN=

OTHER RUBRICS :
Perseverance

Hopeful

Positiveness -

Clinging held being amel.

PwON>

j.

: Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 128 ---
—

3

a"
Association for Scientific

7
os
hee
—_
ist]
cis
Oo
(3)
[e)
£
{e)
x
i=
;£
(S)
ae
- ©
a!)

-Homoeopathy and Mind

He will continue taking medicine even though he is getting
no such relief but he is hopeful and moreover his "Positiveness"
i.e. his claims to be right in taking medicine from you, will concept
him to come to take medicine.


--- Page 129 ---
0

Homoeopathy and Mind
ANTIMONIUM CRUD

There are three very important rubrics of this medicine :
1. | Anger touched when
2. Weeping touched when
3. Love sick

He weeps when he is hurt badly and is full of anger. He
thinks that he has been betrayed in his affections. He never
expected this kind of behaviour from tne other person whom he
loved so much. Many cases have been cured on the basis of
only*these three rubrics.

A Case : An advocate who loved his younger brother very much,
used to give him his land on contract at very cheap rates. This
time when he went to his village, his brother told him that he is
not going to take his land anymore, he could give it to anybody
else and he has taken someone else's land on contract. The
advocate came to me. He was full of anger and remorse. Though
he was of 50 years, he started weeping and wept a lot and asked
why his brother has behaved in this way though he loved him
very much. He got well with a single dose of Antimonium Crud
30.

f

Association for Scientific Research in. Homoeopatrhy

A Case : A case of a professor very courageous and brave who
could never even think of weeping. Her brother died. She was
very much attached to her brother and his family. After few days
of his brother's death, she came to know that before his brother's
death his brother's in-laws had humiliatéd him very much. She
felt it very bad and in full rage she started weeping. She was
badly hurt by that incident. She said, "I will never talk to my bhabi
and her children. | don't even want to look at the road going to
her house." A single dose of this medicine of 30 potency cured
her. On the very next morning she telephoned her bhabi and her
children and went to meet them.

A Case : A case of a principal, very wise and intelligent. One day
she came to me and she was in great rage. She had been tortured

i a a


--- Page 130 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

by relatives. She cried a lot. | can't believe that a person of this
calibre and at so high post, so bold, can be so hungry for love. A
single dose of this medicine of 30 potency cured her.

Explanation of "Touch" by Dr. M.L. Sehgal

More important in this context is where feelings or
sensitivities are affected, where words and thoughts touch the
mind and provoke strong displeasure and desire for retaliation. .

Explanation of "Love-sick" by Dr. M.L. Sehgal

Feeling of a warm personal attachment for someone which
has taken over the mind so deeply that it has started affecting
him like a disease and is not free from it at any time of day.

_~
i ong
h
ew)
[3]
Qo.
[e)
ib)
[e)
£
ie)
=
£
ce
(>)
[a
La]
@
”
cob)
ng
(S)
=
~
bang
a)
oO
i¢p)
a =
(@)
=
l=
fo)
—.
is
oO
()
w
oO
=



--- Page 131 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

a ZINCUM METALLICUM

MAIN RUBRICS :

Delusion accused she is (Lauro, Zinc Met)

Delusion persecuted she is

Delusion sleep deprived of sleep

Delusion murdered she will be

Speech repeats same thing

She feels that she is being accused, being persecuted,
being tortured. She thinking that she will be killed, so she can't
sleep. She repeats the same thing.

+++¢+4

OTHER RUBRICS :

Speech angry (Singular)

Delirium violent retrained and calmed with great difficulty is
Anger stabbed anyone so that he could have

Delusion voices hears abusive & filthy language from within
him speaking in

Anger violent, wishes, he might get at someone on whom
she might vent it

Weeping whimpering, anger, with during

Answers monosyllabic, yes or no

The patient speaks in rage. His anger is very difficult to
control. At that time if he had anything in his hands, he could
have stabbed the person. He hears the filthy language coming
from within herself. She is raging inside and wants to went out
on someone on whom she can (mostly her husband). She cries
in anger. She gives very few replies to the queries, either in yes
or no.

++ + $444

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Anger alternating with timidity

+ Anger alternating with cheerfulness
* Cares others about

+ Cares relatives for

al
fa
* ho
del
&
a.
}
co)
ie)
&
e)
c
=}
=
oO
be
[yeJ
®
2)
®
eg
S)
=
_:
S
—)
oO
Y)
des
2)
=
S
2)
=
A
oO
(2)
9)
2)
o §

106



--- Page 132 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

Her anger alternates with timidity, bashfulness and
cheerfulness. She cares for his relatives and others. Suppose if
her mother-in-law accuses her, she gets very angry but still she
cares for her.

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ = Irritability music during
+ Impatience, talk of other, aggravates
If someone plays some songs or talks, she gets irritated
and restless.

ANOTHER ASPECT OF HIS NATURE :

+  Superstitious

+ Light shuns (closing eyes ameliorates)

+ Death presentiment of, calmly thinks 4 death
+ Contented

+ Secretive

+

Cares relatives for

She has delusion that she is suffering from cancer but she
will never go for a test. She, very calmly, thinks of death and is
contented. She goes on balancing last accounts and making her
husband the nominee of everything but keeps it a secret from
her family. Because she cares for her relatives.

>
es
i
~~
Ls)
2.
°
a
fe)
E
e)
ne
os
=
fe)
lew
is)
-@
”
@
o
)
roy
Pw]
c
a
oO
W”)
he
fe)
ee
c
°
=
&
)
fe)
a
7)
<

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Fear dark of
+ Fear alone of being
+ Company ameliorates
But no "Light desire for"
He is afraid of darkness and being alone. He always desires |
for company. But there is no desire for light.

OTHER RUBRICS : . |
# Runs fright as if in (singular)



--- Page 133 ---
mt oe

Homoeopathy and Mind

Delusion devils sees

Delusion devil after her, is

Delusion images moving up & down sees (singular)
Delusion dogs sees

Fear devils of (singular)

Grief delusions from

Fear ghosts of

Anxiety, apparition, while awake, anguish from horrible
He feels as if he has seen ghosts, they are chasing him.
He sees images moving up & down.:He thinks that he has seen
dogs who would eat him. He is sick of these delusions & runs
about in fear.

++ +H 4+ + +

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Delusion, crime, committed he had a
+ Delusion, evil done, some evil he had (Cyclamen & Zinc)
+ Delusion, pursued by police (Cup Met & others)
+ Delusion, arrested is about to be (Cup Met, Zinc Met &
others)
+ Runs, fright as if ina
+ Escape, attempts to, restrained with difficulty, is

He feels as if he has committed some crime. He is being
chased by police and would soon be caught. So he runs in fear
and tries to escape. It is very difficult to control him:

D.D.
Cupr Met :
+ Hide desire to
fear on account of being
Zinc Met:
+ Runs fright as if in
That means the patient of Cuprum Met hides due to his
fears whereas in Zinc Met runs in fear.

108

~~
<=
e=|
isd
a
fe]
®
fe)
£ F
°
a
£
<
©
=
®&
®
”
®
ow
()
[read
er]
c
2
oO
YW)
_
ie)
—
c
iS
Coad
fe
[S)
[e)
wn
2)
—{



--- Page 134 ---
ud Homoeopathy and Mind

OTHER RUBRICS :

Dullness understands question only after repetition
Answer, repeats the question first

Mildness

Mood changeable, variable

Play dirty tricks on others or their teachers, schoo! boys
Torments everyone with his complaints

Walk aversion to

Weather thunderstorm before, mental symptoms
Unconscious suppression of eruptions after

$4444 H4

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 135 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind
RHUS TOX

We have been applying Rhus Tox in the cases of arthritis
or some problems arising after getting wet in rains. The patient
feels stiffness when he begins to walk but feels relieved after
continuous walking. When he gets restlessness, walking gives
him relief. He can't take his hands out of his quilts as his hands
get chilled. But it has very clear mind rubrics which we had
never applied because we never knew it. No teacher has
taught us. These are in the mind section of repertory of Dr.
Kent.

KINGPIN OF RHUS TOX :
Fear superstitious

) In this rubric there is only Rhus Tox and Dr. Sehgal defined
__ it for the first time like this :
Superstitious :Any belief having no logic or logical background,
no argument, no reasoning is sufficient to rid of him, this idea
which is troubling him. e.g. In last winters/summers (or so and
_ so months) | had this problem, now | fear | might suffer again. Or
a cat has crossed the road, someone has sneezed, some
__ unfortunate person crossed the way, had dreamt of some accident
or death etc. So both the elements of superstition and fear are
_ there and there is no logical background.

>
=
de
=
Ls]
a.
o
i)
o
=
2)
ai
A=
x=.
©)
-
4]
®
C2)
®
~
oO.
=
=]
ec
ty
rm?)
Ww
mR
fe)
-_
c
2)
=
ay
Oo
fe]
2)
t's]
<<

OTHER IMPORTANT RUBRICS :

+ Carried desire to be fast

+ Cares full of business about

+ Escape attempts to, run away to

Version : “Dr. Sahib, last year in this month/season, | got this

illness, | fear this might happen even now. Give me some
“medicine so as to escape from this pain. | fear, § will have
_ same symptoms. Give me same medicine which would give

instant relief otherwise my work (business) would suffer."

—— oe



--- Page 136 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

Carried desire to be fast : This is anothe’ important rubric where
the patient wants to get well soon because he is afraid of suffering.
The patient says, "Dr. Sahib, give me instant relief otherwise |
won't come. Then you shouldn't blame me. Dr. Sahib, have you
medicine in homoeopathy which cures fast? | never take
homoeopathy medicines because they act very slowly."

D.D.
Belladonna

In Belladonna there should be Laughing, Light desire,
Frivolous which are not in Rhus Tox. In Belladonna there is no
Cares full of business about, Simply superstitious but not Fear
Superstitious.

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Cares full of business about (Puls and Rhus Tox)
+ Delirium business talks of

He is very much concerned about his business.

D.D.

Bryonia :

Fear poverty of

Fear starving of

-Anxiety money matter about

Bargaining

These are not in Rhus Tox but here is "Fear superstitious”.

on)
ples;
>
Joy
. &
fox
xe)
ao
. Oo
£
te)
om
=
x=
O
pad
C3)
{¢})
_ Ww
®
[eg
oO
Je
Ss
[=
2
[S)
vy)
a
fe)
——
QO
s
is
[o)
a?)
”
”
<x

+++

OTHER RUBRIC :
+ = Shrieking aid for, sleep in
(Shrieking means uttering a sharp cry, a voice which is unpleasant
to ears. Sleep is a state of unawareness, unconscious of his
action.)
(Aid means not full help but just a part of it)

Here also because of fear superstitious, the patient shrieks
and calls for help because he has fear. He wants some medicine
which can cure him fast.

——— a a oe



--- Page 137 ---
=

Homoeopathy and Mind

D.D.
Delirium crying help for
(Crying means a loud utterance)
(Help is an assistance which is must)
(Aid is assistance which is complementary to one's own efforts,
i.e. aid is welcome but not essential)
(Delirium going off the rails, like a person talking under the action
of drug)

OTHER RUBRICS :

Fear of being murdered

Fear of being poisoned

Fear evil of

Fear of killing

Fear sleep, go to sleep

Fear of misfortune

Fear hurt of being

Delusion murdered he will be

Delusion poisoned he is about to be

Delusion pursued he was by enemies

Starting sleep during

Restlessness midnight after

Fear driving him place to place

Delusion die he is about to be

Delusion deserted, she has been, forsaken by a'near friend
(Singular)

Unfortunate feels

Weeping causeless without knowing why

Fear dark of

From above rubrics, Dr. Rajan Shankaran has given the
situation of a daughter-in-law, wife of an alcoholic person, alone
in the house with her husband, who is capable of killing her,
would have all these fears or may be have fear superstitious,
that she is forsaken by her husband, her in-laws will kill her,
especially at night.

a
=
=
a
a.
fe]
oO
o
E
(eo)
as
=
=
Oo
he
i")
®
“”
Qo |
ae
a)
s
f=
@
| ©
a?)
mS
| ©
_—
=
©
=
8
Oo
[°)
2)
ny
a ¢

FH FHHFHHH HHH HHH HHH



--- Page 138 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

The patient is unable to sleep because of fear and is driven
here and there. She would suddenly get up from her sleep
because she has fear of being killed, being poisoned. She thinks
herself to be unfortunate, would cry without any no reason. You
can apply this in any other similar case, this is just an example.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Ailment from anticipation, foreboding, presentiments
Thoughts tormenting, thoughts persistent

Anxiety abandoned her as if a friend had

Anxiety, alone as if and all about were dead
Delusion alone as if and all about were dead & still
Anxiety thought from sad

Fear thinking sad things of

Delusion farewell, she had bid, friend to a near

$++4+4444

>
Ao
—
ut
OH

Qa
°o
(eb)
fe)
=
[e)
<
=
x=
oO
pas
cs)
®
”
®
(0
oO
=
Saal
Cc
2
[S)
Y)
_
je)
bee

OTHER RUBRICS :

Aiiment from money from losing
Anxiety children about his

Anxiety family about his

Cares relatives about

Delusion injured is being"

Delusion looking at her everyone is
Insanity position from fear to loose the
Insanity job from fear to loose the
Insanity fortune after losing

Fear position to lost his lucrative
Mildness, Praying

Association

+++ Hoos

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ Spit desire to

+ = Striking knocking his head against wall & things
+ Suicide disposition courage but lacks

+ Talks himself to



--- Page 139 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind
CAUSTICUM

The patient of this medicine usually has leadership qualities.
He never bows before injustice and readily helps the down-
trodden. On one hand he is very affectionate and on the other he
is a fighter against injustice. So both these pictures (sympathy
and fight) go hand in hand for a patient of Causticum. On one
hand he listens to the woes of others and on the other he rises
against people who are unjust. But he never fights alone. He has
this art to make others follow him. He always works in groups
and the problem of any member, is his own problem.
RUBRICS :
Anarchist
Defiant
Dictatorial, domineering, dogmatical
Disobedience
Fanaticism
Quarrelsome
Mildness
Affectionate
Sympathetic

+++ +++ +o +

He sticks to whatever he has in his mind, and always thinks
himself to be right but always interferes in other's work and finds
faults with others. Whenever he listens to the woes of others, he
gets disturbed. He feels greatly relieved by heiping others. He is
never careless in any quarrel and is suspicious about every
incidence. He knows that he is mostly occupied in the court cases
which create some problems for him. So he gets a little suspicious.
RUBRICS :

Obstinate
Positiveness
Censorious, critical
Anxiety others for
Cares others for

++++4

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 140 ---
1
fe
:
Sel
wo
a
zo
®
°
a=
(e)
=
£
cs
VES
p=
©
a)
”
teh)
a
(3)
q.:
=
c
2
oO
7p)
-
(e)
=
fos
(a)
&
oO
fe)
”
ms
C=

+++ $4444 4+4+44

Homoeopathy and Mind §

Injustice cannot support

Delusion robbed is going to be

Horrible things & sad stories affect-her profoundly
Grief

+++ 4+

If we look at the sexuality of this man who is so sympathetic
towards others and fights for injustice, is very dirty. If he helps
others, he wants to enjoy them sexually and usually has sexual
contact outside his home. He perform anal sex with females. If
we look at his childhood, he has never been interest in studies.
He neither had a good memory nor good understanding. He was
weak in maths, especially in algebra and geometry.

RUBRICS :

Hypocrisy

Affectation

Amativeness

Amorous

Antisocial

Character lack of

Lascivious

Love anal coition with a woman
Obscene, Lewd

man searching for, little girls
Concentration difficulty studying while, learns with difficulty.
Mathematics inability for, algebra, geometry
Calculating inability
It is worth mentioning that both the above pictures will go
together.

(It is important to note here that it is not necessary that this
person has only one motive to have sexual links but if chance is
given he will never miss the opportunity. There is no doubt that
he has sympathy for the poor as well.)


--- Page 141 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

PHOSPHORUS

The patient of Phosphorus wins the heart of everyone on
the very first sight with his humanity, affection and kind
heartedness. He leaves.a lasting impression because of his
extrovert nature even in a small meeting.

RUBRICS : |
+  Affectionate returns affection
+ Mildness

+ Patience
+ Magnetised desire to be

“Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

: He is contented, helpful and can undertake things even

against his intentions just to win the affection of others. This is

not only an affectation, rather in return he craves for the love and

affection of others and thus wins the hearts of everyone around.

| If a patient of Lyco cr Platina gets his work done with arrogance
or strictness, the patient of phosphorus gets it done out of love.
RUBRICS :

Content

Undertakes things against his intentions

Craving for affections

Dictatorial

impressionable

It is said about the patient of phosphorus that he has very

sharp eyes. A patient of Opium sees through his ears, whereas

the patient of phosphorus hears through his eyes. He is very

watchful and throws a hurried glance all around him, understand

it and even anticipates the results.

Ahwn>

RUBRICS :
1. Children, watchful, who are on the look out for every
gesture

2. Senses acute
3. Memory active
4. Clairvoyance

————— oe


--- Page 142 ---
117

2)
=
be
—
Cs]
a
fe)
@
°
£
(e)
a Os
£
t=
[S)
t
&
®
”
®
of
oOo
=
P=}
c
9
oO
WM.
te
2
c
(°)
peer]
5
[S)
ce)
(77)
”
<

Homoeopathy and Mind

He has no qualms in entrapping you in his love and then
having sexual relations. If we gather the following rubrics then
we have a full picture of phosphorus. °
RUBRICS :

Adulterous

Hypocrisy

Obscene, old man searches for little girls
Love with one of his own sex; homosexuality
Amativeness

Amorous

Shamelessness

Naked wants to be

OANOARWN >

Apart from the above picture of Phosphorus we can't ignore
his fears. He, like a patient of Ars. Alb, is very afraid of living
alone and darkness. He has fear of death while living alone and
afraid of insects in darkness. He is also very scared of
thunderstorm and lightning. Whenever there is storm and
lightning, he closes all his windows and doors, draws all curtains
and sometimes admits that he even covers his eyes. If asked
about the reason of this fear, he will say that there is no particular
reason.

RUBRICS :

Fear alone of being, lest to die

Fear death alone when

Fear dark of

Fear, creeping out of every corner, of something
Fear of thunderstorm

Fear of lightening

Anxiety causeless

NOaAhWN =

OTHER RUBRICS :

+ — Light desire for

* Helplessness feeling of

# Delusion, great person, he is a



--- Page 143 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

Deiusion, rank he is a person of

Delusion, wealth, of

Delusion, seized, as if

Delusion, distinguished is

Delusion, obscene action of which she had not been guilty,
accuses herself

Delusion pursued police by

¢ +4444

| Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 144 ---
>
&
Le
pat
. ©
jo
f°]
@
fe)
E
ae)
x
=
=
[z)
=
©
@
”
®
~
S)
=
=
c
2
(2)
”)
ls
(2)
en
S
°
&
oO
3°
@
<

Homoeopathy and Mind
TUBERCULINUM

Although more than two hundred years have passed since
homoeopathy came into existence, we still know few rubrics for
certain medicines which are used as specific medicines without
individualisation, which is against the rules of homoeopathy. We
have never tried to know the real picture of these medicines.
One of such medicines is Tuberculinum. Majority of the
homoeopaths recommend this medicine only when they find
Tuberculosis in the case history or when their selected medicines
don't work. But if we read it attentively, a very clear picture comes
into our mind and which makes this medicine useful in common
cases.

RUBRICS :
1. Change desire for
2. Ennui

(In both the above rubrics, Tub is common)
3. | Wander, desire to
4. Travel, desire to

The most important feature is that he wants very rapid
change in everything and his desire for change drives him from
one place to another. He is also fond of wandering. Dr. Pathak in
the mind section of his Materia Medica writes that a patient of
Tuberculinum never takes medicine for long from one doctor. He
changes his doctors very rapidly. May be because he gets tired
of one thing very easily.

RUBRICS :

1. Precocity.

Hopeful

Anger, violent fits of

Control, lack of emotional (Murphy Rep.)

Anger.throws things away

‘Throws things away, persons at

Malicious, spiteful, vindictive

Striking himself, knocking his head against walls and things
Pull one's hair, desire to

= ee pF Big So


--- Page 145 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind By

10. Tears things, hair, her
11. Breaks things, desire to

He is precocious and optimistic but very hot tempered. He
gets violent fits of anger and then whatever comes to his hands
he throws it away. If he is able to hit the thing, then it is well and
good, otherwise he would punish himself like hitting his head at
the floor, to pull his or others hairs, bite himself.

He gives threats that he would run. away from home and at
times he actually runs away. In anger he curses and breaks things.
He is a person with suicidal disposition. He is scared of cats,
dogs or bad omens. He is also very industrious and has mania
for work.

RUBRICS :

12. Threatening

13. Impulse, run to, dromomania
14. Cursing, swearing

15. Suicidal disposition

16. Fear, dogs of, cats of

17. Fear, happen something will
18. Industrious, mania for work

If we gather the above rubrics we get two sides of personality.
i) Destructiveness .
ii) Self-torture (Torments himself) !

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 146 ---
121

a
pl
Tee
Per]
o
oo
°
a:
o
£
(°]
x
£
<=
. &
wm
C3]
fob)
”
@
a
a)
=
¢
RS)
Oo
Lép)
mw
rs
}
Sek |
r=]
Ss
o
°
“
“
<

Homoeopathy and Mind

VERATRUM ALBUM
MAIN RUBRICS :
Hopeful
High spirited
Wander desire to
Delusion wealth of
Delusion God, he is in communication with God
Delusion Christ, he is
Insanity religious
Fear, society, of his position, in
Boaster rich wishes to be considered
Truth tells plainly
Liar, lies never speaks the truth does not know what she is
saying.
On the basis of above rubrics, many cases have been
solved.

+++ +++ +o oo 4%

A Case : A patient was getting treatment for a long time but
there was not much improvement. When he was asked that why
is he taking medicines when there was no sign of improvement,
the patient replied, "! take medicine with full faith. It will definitely

- work and | will get cured." When he was asked about his views

regarding life, he replied that he is a high spirited person. On
further enquiries he told us that he loved wandering. That case
recovered with this medicine.
RUBRICS :

+ Hopeful

+ High spirited

+ Wander desire to

A Case : An old man was kept on catheter, for the last fifteen
days. The doctor had recommended him to get operated. On
some other patient's suggestion, he came for homoeopathy. |
observed that his one leg had been amputated from the knee.
On enquiry he told me that he got his leg fractured but it had to



--- Page 147 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

be amputated due to gangrene.

But he didn't seem to be depressed, rather he was high
spirited. When he was asked whether he would improve or not,
he replied, "I will get cured. | am not much bothered. | am very
much satisfied with whatever God has given." With a single dose
of medicine, he recovered. Within a week his catheter was
removed and he could urinate properly.

RUBRICS :

+ Hopeful

+ High spirited

+ Delusion wealth of

A Case : A young man of 30 years was working in the court.
Being religious, he went to Naina Devi on bicycle. When he came
back, he wore a langoti, a feather on his head, made the earth
his seat and got removed all the cots/beds, started blowing the
conches and said that he himself was the Lord Shiva and nobody
could do him any harm. With a single dose of this medicine, he
was totally cured. On third day he went back to his bed and said
that he wanted to hit the stomach of Shiva and on the fifth day, .
went back to the court.

RUBRICS :

+ Delusion God, he is in communication with God

+ Delusion Christ he is

+ Insanity, religious

>
=
ton
oe
©
fou
ie)
cy
Q.
=
(o)
<=
c
S
ft)
be
c
o
rm)
@
ag
re)
al
c
2.
e)
”
_
°
Mee
=,
fe)
hep
a
re)
3S.
a
rm)
<



--- Page 148 ---
123

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Homoeopathy and Mind
HYDRASTIS

_ When we applied Veratrum, in two rubrics it was common
with Hydrastis (Hopeful and high spirited). But when we asked
about the desire to wander both these medicines were opposite
to each other.

Verat. Alb ' Hydrastis

Hopeful Hopeful

High spirited High spirited

Wander desire to Going out aversion to

A Case : A girl who was taking medicine for long, when asked
that why she was taking medicine, she replied that she would
recover from here. She was very optimistic and high spirited. On
further enquiry, she told that she is not much fond of wandering.
Moreover she had no interest in studies.

RUBRICS :

_@ ~~ Hopeful

+ High spirited
# Going out aversion to
# Reading aversion to
D.D.
Sanguinaria Can

This is in 'Hopeful of recovery’. Although there are many
medicines in Hopeful, but there is only one medicine in 'Hopeful
of recovery’. On enquiry, the patient would reply, "! am 101%
hopeful that | will recover." It is very near to Cocculus, but it has
no other point of similarity with Cocculus. The only rubric which
is close to Cocculus is : Recognises reality and accepts it.

Last year, we attend Sehgal's seminar at New Delhi, where
Dr. M.K. Dua reported a case of a Russian lady, suffering from
4th stage breast cancer with metastasis in various vertebras was
fully cured (reports shown before and after treatment) with single
dose of Sanganaria Can. It was given only on the basis of these
two rubrics
1. Recognise reality and accepts i.e. she keiew that she had



--- Page 149 ---
# Homoeopathy and Mind

the dreaded disease
2. Hopeful of recovery and she was confident of her recovery
Cocculus Indicus
- %  Discouraged (Sang. C is Not)
+ Recognises reality and accepts it.
Natrum Mur

In one condition Natrum Mur iso falls in the rubric of
"Hopeful’. If we have a look on the Synthesis Repertory till fifth
edition (because in new edition many medicines have been added
to the main rubric of from Synthesis edition in Complete cui
we see that in two rubrics Natrum Mur alone works.
+ Hopeful
+ Objective reasonable 7

That means the patient has solid reasons for taking
homoeopathy. He has earlier recovered from homoeopathy i.e.
why he has come to you. He would say that you had cured him
earlier that's why he has come to you. This shows that he is
hopeful. If you ask him whether he would recover, he would reply
in the affirmative.
Belladonna

With minor difference there is Belladonna, here the patient
has no solid reasons. He has come to you because he was told

_ by someone that he had recovered.
‘+  Superstitious
+ Objective reasonable
' * Credulous L

And other features of Belladonna
# Laughing speaking when
+ Carried desire to be fast
+ Frivolous

eopatrhy

PY

o
=
fe)
<
£
<<
oO
tee
%
@
22)
ce)
o~
Oo
a
-
c
2
O°
ip)
po
[e)
=
Cc
o
7
Lav]
Oo
(°)
W)
es)
c=


--- Page 150 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind
NITRIC. ACID

MAIN RUBRICS :

+ Perseverance

+ Objective reasonable
The patient takes his medicine regularly that means he

perseveres. The patient of Nitric Acid has very strong reasons

for taking homoeopathy. He perseveres due to some logic. Even

his family members tell him to switch on to allopathy but he is

very stable because he has solid reasons to stick to his mind.

An important Case : Our first case was of a patient suffering
from some incurable disease who insisted that he would take
homoeopathy alone and gave us the reason for that. He was
suffering from 'Polycythemia Vera’ and his Hb used to increase
to 21 gms. He had to get his blood removed every week. His
hands itched badly, he used to scratch his hands continuously
for five to seven minutes, but insisted that he would take
homoeopathy alone and told us that he had solid reasons for
that.
+ Perseverance .
+ Objective reasonable

At later stage in complete repertory, nitric acid has also
been added in 'Hopeful' rubric:also.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy


--- Page 151 ---
DROSERA

Drosera is closer to the earlier mentioned medicines but
there is difference of one symptom, it has one additional

symptom.
+ Perseverance’
+ —Pertinacity

+ Obstinate, execution of plans in (Singular)
+ Plans, carrying out insists on (Singular)
"But not in objective reasonable" _ ;

That means he keeps on trying, perseveres, clings to the
physician. He is stubborn and sticks to what he has in his mind
but without any reason. He is not ‘objective reasonable’.

We will have to find such rubrics. We will have to find suitable
words for the slangs (version) used by the patient in Hindi or
Punjabi so that neither we should fail nor the youngsters guided
by us. Moreover there is no need to get out of the mind section.

Homoeopathy and Mind

>
&
we
Per)
oO
Q
le)
®
ie)
£
o
=
is
=.
©
be
in)
(cb)
YW)
i)
Be
Fi -
=
s
os]
i
oO
Y)
hee
Oo
[ree
Cc
Lo}
es}
{3
oO
{°)
Ww)
”)
bo



--- Page 152 ---
_
=
=
+.
. &
Qa
n°
oo
°
=
o
<
os
<=
o
en
U4]
®
C2)
®
x
Oo
[rand
-_
c
o
o
”
tn
2
i
ie)
eer]
&
oO
©
a
”
<

Homoeopathy and Mind

SPIGELIA
High spirited
Content
Cheerful alternating with palpitation, sadness
Fear suffering of
Anxiety from anticipation
Absorbed future about (Singular)
Thoughts profound future about (Cycl, Spigelia)
Anxiety pains from the eyes in (Singular)
Shrieking, pain with the feet (Singular)
Sadness, suicidal disposition with
Death desires during chill
Cares full of relatives about
The person is high spirited and content. But is also very
anxious about his future. Whenever he thinks of difficult times
ahead, he gets absorbed in deep thoughts. He is worried about
his future especially when he has pain in his eyes. He anticipates,
how much pain he would have to bear if he goes blind. He shrieks
as he won't be able to use his feet properly. Even if everything is
going fine now, he is worried about the pain that might come in
the future. Otherwise, he is satisfied with his present and ir
contented. But whenever he anticipates, pain in the future, he
gets so much dejected that he thinks of even committing suicide.
He is worried that what would happen to him if he loses his eye
sight or gets difficulty in walking. He doesn't want to die a wriggling
death. He is concerned about his relatives too.

+++ +o +o +o $+ +

OTHER RUBRICS :
+ Thinking complaints agg.
+ Rebels against poultices
+  Restlessness driving about
+ Occupation diversion ameliorates
His thinking about his pain aggravates his condition. He
gets irritated if someone wants to give him false hope. His



--- Page 153 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

restlessness drives him here and there. If he is occupied he feels
relief because he has no time to think about his problems.

‘OTHER RUBRICS :

Delusions pins about .

Fear hurt of being
Fear pin, pointed things

Fear touch of

Sensitive steel points directed towards her .

He is afraid of sharp things likes pins, thorns. He keeps
same thinking about them because he is afraid of suffering i-e.
he wants to have the flowers but without thorns.

$++44

D.D.

‘In Bryonia Alba and Calc Carb, ‘Fear suffering of is common
with Spigelia but Spigelia does not have the following rubrics :
+ No fear poverty of
+ No fear starving of
+ No business talks of
+ No bargaining
Instead of this, Spigelia is contented.

In the recent past, we have cured many cases with Spigelia
only on the basis of two rubrics ‘content’ and ‘absorbed future
about’. The patient says, “! have no such problem today but what
will become of it in future. | can tolerate my problem now (content),
it does not disturb me, but what will happen in future "absorbed
future about it".

Spongia
+ High spirited
+ Frivolous

It means ‘double shade’. He is always optimistic and never
bothers much about his illness. When the others in similar conditions
would get concerned, he is careless about his illness. He tells the
doctor that he would get well soon. He keeps on taking medicines.
We have applied in several cases and got good results.

)
£ ,
OS)
C3]
2.
(o}
®
[e)
=
{2}
as
=
dS
i)
=
C4]
@
”
c)
[a
oO
=
Ss
f=
md |
[S)
Ww).
h
°o
[rel
=
[2]
=
he
Co
°
2)
2)
ft



--- Page 154 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

JALAPA
The child is good all day, but cross all night. He gets restless
in sleep.
RUBRICS :

+ = Irritability, children, good all day, cross all night.
+ Weeping sleep in; child good. during the day, screaming
and restiess at night

D.D.
Lycopodium
The child is cross all day but sleeps at night. He is scared
of darkness. When he gets up, he cries and kicks. He is scared
of strangers. When he is sick, he becomes very irritable and
pushes the nurse away.
RUBRICS :
+ Irritability, children is cross all day, good all night
’ Irritability; sick when pushes nurse away
+ Kicks; child is cross, kick & scolds on waking
(Lyco, Sanicula)
+ Fear, dark of
+ Fear strangers of

=
Ff ea
=
=)
Ey)
&
=
®
oO
E
~
x=
7S
Ft on
oO
, =
15°)
®
”
i)
oe
o
=
=
=
2
oO
w
I
2
c
°
=
ag
(%)
o
ve)
nn
<x

Psorinum :

The child is sleepless day and night. The obstinate children,
annoy people around them. ‘
RUBRICS :

+ Irritability children in, sleepless day & night.
+  Obstinate children, annoy those around him

Sanicula :

The child does not allow anyone to touch him. He can't
bear anyone to lie close to him. He is afraid of darkness and
wants light to be switched on.

RUBRICS :
1. Touched aversion to being, cannot bear anyone to lie close



--- Page 155 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind (RY

or touch him (Complete Rep.)

2. Fear dark of
3. Light desire for
4. Darkness agg.,
a= aversion to
5. Darkness aversion to
Borax :

The child clings to one person alone. He grasps the nurse
when carried. He is afraid of falling down and gets frightened
even at sneezing. He gets scared when he is put in the cradle or
is being rocked. He clings to anyone around.

RUBRICS :
1. Clinging to person or furniture etc.

child awakens terrified, knows no one, screams, clings to
those near —
grasps the nurse when carried
Frightened easily sneezing at
Starting, startled, anxious, downward motion from
Weeping, children, cries when rocked
Anxiety, children, in when being put in cradle
Shrieking children, stool before

‘Research in Homoeopatrhy

~
tod

Oahwh

rel
S
bond
a
(>)
”)
x
°
—
Cc
°
=
13)
oO,
o
”
@!
<


--- Page 156 ---
131

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Homoeopathy and Mind

COFFEA CRUDA
MAIN RUBRICS: —
Activity creative
Activity increased excessive
Activity sleeplessness with
Clinging to person, furniture etc.
Plans makes many
Air castles (plans) builds in
Quick to act —

“oO ere © >

For those people who are very creative. Their whole activity
is creative and they are in a hurry to execute them and stick to
them. There is no destructive activity or aimless activity. The do
excessive activity with sleeplessness.

AN IMPORTANT RUBRIC :
Impulse to pinch (Murphy Repertory)

This rubric has been applied in cases where there is an
impulse to pinch either in the cases of children or elders.

A Case:A teacher age 45 years, couldn't resist his impulse to
pinch even in bus. He used to apologize immediately for his nasty

‘ habit but he was helpless. With a single dose of Coffea Cruda

30, he recovered well.



--- Page 157 ---
CUPRUM ACETUM

MAIN RUBRICS :
1. Anxiety study from

resisted cannot be, effects of over study.
2. Weeping child like a

A Case : A student of 10+2 got scared and started crying like a
child when he had to appear for a test on tuition. He said, "I don't
want to study, | won't prepare." He has been studying for fourteen
hours daily. He recovered with a single dose of Cuprum Acetum
30.

Homoeopathy and Mind Bik

>
eo
tea
_
o
Q
°
feb)
[o)
£
o
Z,
=
ony
[o)
tes
[se]
feb)
i¢2)
®
of
ae
=
rer)
c
9
[)
):
=
je)
ae
c
(@)
ror)
%
oO
°
7)



--- Page 158 ---
133

fos
=
er)
[3°]
Qa
fe]
®
°
E
[e)
a os
£
=
[S)
ie
[3°]
®
2)
[ob)
~
[S)
—
ver}
c
&
oO
”
hea
2
<
[e)
rer]
s
oO
(e)
w”
”
C=

Homoeopathy and Mind

LAC CAN

MAIN RUBRICS :

Anxiety success, from doubt about

Fear duties, she will become unable to perform her
Delusion short, he is

Fear failure of

Confidence want of self

Despair of recovery

He has delusions that he won't be successful. " am afraid
that | won't be able to perform my duties. My penis is small and
| might fail. | lack in self confidence and | think | will never recover".
This attitude can be about life/illness or sexual life.

AnkWN>

ANOTHER RUBRIC :

Hysteria coition agg.

Generally men have these fears that he won't be successful.
He will fail because his penis is small and there is no solution to
this problem.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Delusion heart disease is going to have and die

Fear disease incurable of having

Delusion sick being

Delusion sick going to be sick, he is

Fear duties, she will become unable to perform her

Light desire for
’ Delusion dirty he ‘is

Antagonism with herself

The patient suffers from this fear that he may die of heart
attack and her disease is incurable. He is ill or is going to be ill.
Or he is dirty, has been drinking continuously. At times he wants
to get rid of this habit but then changes his mind. He fears that
he might not be able to perform his duties. He is ready to go for
any kind of X-ray, ECG etc. if required.

ONOARWNH>



--- Page 159 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

OTHER RUBRICS :
Delusion, lie, all she said is a
Delusion, looked down upon, she is
Fear heart disease of
- Forgetful, purchases of, goes off & leaves them
Liar, lie, believes all she says is a
Mood changeable
Persists in nothing .
vari meanness to her friends

ONDA WON =

OTHER RUBRIC :

Delusion snakes, lying on a ise snake, she were

We have got wonderful results when we-applied this rubric
in the cases where there was fear of snakes, fear to come down
from bed as if snake is under him.

A Case : For long, a case of pimples was not getting well. One
day the child told me that he studies a lot but always lies about
this to his friends. He recovered with a single dose of this medicine
of 30 potency, on the basis of following rubric: -

+ — Liar, believes all she says is a lie

+ Writing meanness to her friends.

>
=
dew
~~
©
a.
i)
®
°
=
fe)
1
&
=
5)
@
®
”
®
fe
2)
4
rer)
=
et
re)
79)
ne
°
a
=
iS)
S
os
O
°
a
i'2)
<.


--- Page 160 ---
135

>
<=
a
er
o
2.
ae)
@
°
=
°
ae
£
“Se
oO
=
Ly]
. a
”
o
om
rs)
=
-
&
2
oO
77)
=
2)
hm
c
“es
PS
&
oO
We
a
)
<x

Homoeopathy and Mind
PHOSPHORIC ACID

Brooding condition over one's .
Brooding disease over his

Brooding disappointment over

Anxiety disease over his, recovery concerming
(Knerr's Rep.)

Sit inclination to

Anxiety children about

= oi

oe)

The patient is always brooding about his condition or illness.
While sitting at one place long, he keeps thinking whether he
would get well or lot. She has great anxiety for children.

A Case : A man of 30 years, became impotent and was very
depressed. He said, "| am always brooding about my condition.
While sitting at the cart all alone out side my house, | keep on
thinking about my position for hours long. | am worried about the
future of my children if | go on like this. (Rubric : Anxiety children
about), what will be my future (Rubric : Anxiety future about), |
have developed an aversion to work (Business aversion to).”

With a single dose of Acid Phos. 30 he recovered so much
within a week that the next week he came well dressed and was
difficult to be recognized.



--- Page 161 ---
‘Homoeopathy and Mind

CONIUM MAC
MAIN RUBRICS :
1. Light shuns
2. Superstitious
3. ‘Frivolous
4. Religious affections, melancholia, remorse from

Conium was given in those cases where the patient instead
of taking some medicine or going for some X-ray, completely
shuts his eyes and talks of going to the ‘Tantric’. He is superstitious
and is always in search of some Babas/Tantric. This theme has
been applied and verified.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Mania alternate with depression
. Insanity, dresses in his best clothes

Insanity purchases, makes useless

Hurry, haste, movements in

Dress, averse to (Melancholia)

Bed, remain in, desire to

At times he works very fast, is very hard working and ina -
hurry in whatever he does. He gets dressed up in the best clothes
and makes useless purchases. Or at times he is all sad, feels
aversion to dressing up and wants to lie down ih i.e. Mania
alternates depression.

Qaron->

Po)
=
ho
=
©
a.
oO
®
ie)
=
(2°)
i
E
Bi ant
oO
i
i9*]
®
nn
®
x
oO
we
-
=
i
(>)
Ww)
| a
je)
=
c
°
s
aoe
Oo
e)
n
a
<x

OTHER RUBRICS :

Hysteria sexual, suppression of sexual, excitement from
Hysteria coition ameliorates

Hypochondriasis, sexual abstinence from
Hypochondriasis, sexual excess from

Anxiety continence prolonged from

Aiiment from celibacy, continence

These are the rubrics of hysterical cases which,:arise
generally when there is sexual suppression in girls.

Oakwns


--- Page 162 ---
| Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Homoeopathy and Mind

KALI BROM

MAIN RUBRICS :

Delusion, God, is the object of God's vengeance (Singular)
Ailment from death of parents, friends (Complete Rep.)
Ailment from death of a child

Helplessness feeling of

Moaning fate about (Singular) *

"Why this happened to me? My husband is already dead, |
have got two daughters. God is also taking some revenge from
me. There is no solution to my problem." This theme has been
applied and verified.

aQhon-=

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Delusion pursued police by, being a friend for

(Only Kali Brom)
2. Delusion thieves, accused of robbing, he has been

(Only Kali Brom)
3. Delusion danger, impression of

The patient feels that he is being pursued by police because
he has stolen the neighbour's scooter. He is afraid that he might
be caught by the police and he went insane in this fear, bean
and verified.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Moaning, groaning fate, about the (Singular)

Reputation loss, of, agg (M.M. Mind by Dr. H.L. Chitkara)
_ Ailment from reputation loss of

.Delusion, insulted, he is boarders in hotel by (Singular)

Delusion danger impression, of family from his

Delusion life threatened is

Delusion murdered he will be

_NOAbhON=

~


--- Page 163 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind
PLATINA
MAIN RUBRICS :

1. Delusion help calling for (only Platina)
2. Objective reasonable

A Case : The patient says, "Dr. Sahib, | have this problem. First
! took some home made remedies but now | realize that | must
take some medicine. It won't go without medicine. Even earlier |
took homoeopathy and recovered."

| Dr. Sehgal's explanation of ‘Help calling for’

‘A feeling from within, conveying that actually the need for
| | help has arisen. That the system has started asking for help.
_'- Earlier to this it was thought that a little aid in the form of tea, milk
_ or some home made stimulant will suffice to tide over the crisis,
but now | feel that | must get proper medicine.

'

OTHER RUBRICS :

1. Delusion, small things appear

2. Delusion, inferior, people seem mentally & physically
3. Delusion superiority of (Singular)

4. _Dictatorial, dominating

>
=
tees
Scand
«
a
fo)
®
[@)
£.
[@)
x
ae
ihe
fe)
=
4
oO .
m2
a
[eg
(9)
=
Ss
c
2
me)
ep)
fo
ie)
=
[=
(@)
=
2
oO.
ie)
a
oP:
P=

, . "Dr. Sahib, what will these small tablets do, | want some
strong medicines.” Or suppose if he doesn't improve with your
medicine, then he will have a low opinion of yours and will ask
you in a dominating voice to suggest him some other experienced


--- Page 164 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

NICCOLUM MET

MAIN RUBRIC :

1. Delusion sick, going to be sick, he is

2. Delusions sick going severe illness were impending
(Singular).

A Case : A case where the patient had delusions that he might
have some severe. iliness, recovered with this medicine. Even
after his recovery, the patient fears that he might suffer from
some illness or his condition might deteriorate. He fears that he
might be suffering from some dreadful disease. His uncle died of
cancer and he fears the same doom. He doesn't want his work
to come to a stop. His heart goes out (trembles) and he is unable
to sleep.

OTHER RUBRICS :

3. Contradict, evening amel.

4. Contradiction, evening amel.
5. Contrary, evening

>
=
-
~
fs
2.
fe)
Leb)
°
E
)
els
is
<
is)
dee
ise)
-o
o
®
oc
a)
=
=
c
=
es)
”)
hee
fe)
on
3
oS
gs
oO
fe)
ee]
a)
<q


--- Page 165 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

PSORINUM
MAIN RUBRICS : .
1. Anxiety business about, prosperous, though:
(Complete Rep.)
2. Sadness, problems with money matters about
3. Bed remain in desire to

A Case : A man of 40 years told us, "Few days back 1.5 lakh
rupees were stolen from my scooter. | am very sad because of
that. | keep on lying on my bed all the time. My heart cries and |
am losing my memory. Although we have enough land and we
, two brothers are together, but | am always worried about my
business.”

He became perfectly alright with this medicine.

__ OTHER RUBRICS :
| 1. Despair of recovery
2. Bed remain in desire to be
3. Tormenting, everyone with his complaints
He remains in bed all the time and torments others by saying
that he cannot be cured.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 166 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

MEDORRHINUM

MAIN RUBRICS : .
Prophesying, disagreeable events of (Only Medo.)
Fear misfortune of
Fear evil of
Fear happen something will
Delusion happened, that something dreadful had happened
Anxiety, anticipation, from an engagement of
The patient always has foreboding of some disagreeable
events. He is full of negative thoughts that something dreadful
might happened to him and he gets restless. Many cases have
been solved on the basis of these rubrics.

Recently a case of joint pains was cured on the basis of
negative thinking of the patient i.e. on the basis of above rubrics.

OAhWON=

>
Tce
_
~
Ls}
joe
°
o
°
E
ie)
=
Cc
<=
oO
ho
(3)
feb)
7”
ce)
~
[S)
[vee
ver)
=
9
(=)
ie)
i
le)
Nemes
4S
S
Oo
(e)
”
w
c=


--- Page 167 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

BISMUTH.
MAIN RUBRIC :
+ Clinging, take the hand of mother, will always
(Only Bismuth)

OTHER SIMILAR RUBRICS :
1. Fear alone of -
2. Fear solitude of

These children always cling to their mothers. They either
hold their fingers or their shirt. If the mother goes to the bathroom
or toilet, they will stand at the door. They always cling to their
mother.

D.D.

Stramonium

+ Clinging to person, furniture etc.
+ Fear injured of being -

+ Fear dark of

Gelsemium

+ Clinging to person, furniture etc.
+ Quiet wants to be

+ Disturbed averse to being

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 168 ---
>
5 Sy
=
et
is)
Q
le}
®
(°)
E
2)
3S
c
=
O
he
Lys}
Ke)
”
i)
m~
oO
=
=
Cc
A
oO
WY
_
©
—
c
[e)
=
8
©
[e)
ip)
a
b= 6

a? @ =

Homoeopathy and Mind

ELAPS CORRALLINUS

MAIN RUBRICS :
1. | Company desire for
happen.as if something horrible might
alone agg. while

2. Delusion rowdies (Disorderly persons) would break in, if

she were alone
3. Fear robbers of
4. Fear solitude of
5. Delusion, talking he hears

The patient desires for company, can't live alone. He is
fearful that something dreadful might happen. He has this fear
that if he were alone, robbers would break in. He might even
hear them talking. Many cases have been treated on the basis
of these symptoms where there is a fear of being alone and fear
to open the bolt when someone knocks at the door. Because of
his fears, the patient is unable to sleep. He won't go out to urinate.
But after, the medicine the fear completely disappears and if
someone knocks at the door, the patient switches on the light
and opens the door.

The cases which came and recovered with this medicine
are : Mukhtiar Kaur age 60 years, Harwinder Kaur age 42 years,
Harbhajan Kaur age 40 years, Saroj age 27 years.

OTHER RUBRICS :

Delusion beaten:he is being

Delusion injured is being

Desires to be cavern in

Country desire for

Company aversion to, away from people wants to get into
the country.

He feels that he is being beaten, tortured and he wants to go to
his own country (in caverns) because is afraid of robbers/rowdies.


--- Page 169 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind fia

OTHER RUBRICS :
1. Anger spoken to, when
2. Irritability spoken to, when
"3. | Spoken to averse to being
4. Sits still wrapped in deep sad thoughts & notices as if
nothing
He doesn't want to speak to anyone. He gets irritated when
spoken to. He is all quiet and brooding wrapped in deep sad
thoughts and notices nothing happening around him. He has this
foreboding that something terrible might happen. He seeks the
company of others and wants to hide in his house.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy



--- Page 170 ---
~
=
MBM
—
by]
o.
ro)
o
©
VME
e}
x
£
iS
oO
he
4
wo
as)
@®
o
oO
2
PS
c
9
©
7p)
he
2)
—
ij
ae)
Po]
is
oO
o
“)
W)
<

Homoeopathy and Mind

CROTALUS C.

MAIN RUBRICS :

1.
Ee.

Death thoughts of alone when
Fear alone of being

This patient is not afraid of thieves but fears from the ghosts.

OTHER RUBRICS :

1.

ahon

Delusion spectres ghosts sees, death of, as a gigantic black
skeleton

Delusion foot steps hears, behind him

Delusion groans, he hears

Delusion walks behind him someone

Fear behind him someone is


--- Page 171 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind
HEPAR SULPH

This medicine has always been used in the cases of

abscess, boils, suppuration with inflammation. One day, while
studying the case history of a poor woman, it came to lime light
that this medicine has excellent mind rubrics of common use. |
applied and got excellent results.
She said, "I get angry too much upto the extent that | want to kill
my children or | kill myself. Many times due to anxiety | want to
commit suicide. Whole day ! have anxiety of my family and being
very poor | always think how will | carry on my family in future. |
can't sleep at all. | am very poor. Since | got married | have never
seen happiness and joy."

RUBRICS:

Delusion poor she is

Anxiety family about his

Anxiety future about

Rage kill people tries to

Impulse kill beloved one

Anguish attempts to suicide
Threatening kill threatens to

Wrong every thing seems

After this case we started using this medicine frequently and got
very good results on the basis of mind rubrics.

QNOAAhWN>

OTHER RELATING RUBRICS: ;

(Though we have not used these rubrics but they can be applied).
_Anger stabbed anyone, so angry that he could have
Anger violent

Anxiety health of relatives

Care relatives of

Fear health of loved persons about

Cheerful never

Laughing never

++++ +++

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy


--- Page 172 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

AGARICUS
IMPORTANT RUBRIC:
Delusion, smail hole, appears like a frightful chasm
(Singular) my
This rubric has been applied in the patients suffering from a minor
problem but they thought it to be a very big problem.

A Case: A patient had pain in his mouth at the root of the tongue
where he found a small lump. He became so worried that he
consulted 6-7 doctors, in just two days. All test were done, X-ray .
was done, when asked why is he so worried for this small problem,
his wife said that he has the fear that it is cancer.
Rubrics:
+ Delusion small hole appears like a frightful chasm
_ Fear cancer of

Just with one dose of Agaricus, he got well within 2-3 days. Since
two years he is fine.

Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy


--- Page 173 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind.

THEMES OF
Dr. JAN SCHOLTEN'S
‘HOMOEOPATHY and MINERALS
"We have applied and verified”

AMMONIA : Anger, hatred towards some relationships. As the
persons feels suffocated in the presence of Ammonia gas, he is
bitter about some relationship.
1. Mur: Mother
2 Carb : Father
3 Phosphorus : Friend, relatives, brothers, sisters
4. Sulphur : Wife or husband, partner, beloved
So
1. Ammonium Mur : There is some kind of hatred or
bitterness of the daughter/son with the mother or vice versa.
2. Ammonium Carb : Hatred or bitterness of the son or
daughter with the father or vice versa.
3. Ammonium Phosphorus : Hatred or bitterness towards
friends, relatives. One more theme is hatred for the person who
became instrumental in his break in the studies.
4. Ammonium Sulphur : Bitterness in the relation of husband/
wife/lover. .

On the basis of these themes, these médicines have given
wonderful results. ‘

~
£
tems
=~
Ly}
a.
°
i)
°
E
°
<x
Cc
=
oO
tows
ise}
o
2)
o
a
oO
=
P=)
i=
=
oO
yY)
bes
o
e
c
ie)
=
wy
oO
°o
”).
Ww) rid
<

NATRUM : He has to take all decisions alone, has to solve all his
problems himself. Grief.

ARSENIC : Regarding money matters.

BROMIUN : To think oneself guilty.
“4. Natrum Ars.: There is no one to heip, he has to solve all
the money matters alone.

2. Natrum Brom: The patient thinks himself guilty and keeps



--- Page 174 ---
Association for Scientific Research in Homoeopatrhy

Homoeopathy and Mind

it in his heart that he has to solve it on its own. The second
important thing is that he is conscious that he should not say
anything wrong. Otherwise he would feel guilty and won't reply.
3. Natrum Nitricum : He is very fond of watching TV, listening
to the songs but his brothers or father or mother don't allow him
to do so. The theme of this medicine is that "Entertainment is
forbidden for her". In cases where a girl, after marriage, is not
allowed to wander here and there or to stand outside but is
restricted to remain at home. All her enjoyment is restricted. This
medicine has given very good results in such cases.

FERRUM : Obstinate, very hard working, dominating.

1. Ferrum Ars.: He is dominating and wants to be the master
of money matters. He thinks that others are always ready to grab
his property.

2. Ferrum lodine : Very hard working, worried that if he doesn't
work how will he eat?

3. Ferrum Sulph.: Avarice regarding money, has a mania to
work. He is domineering towards his partner, anger alternates
regret.

KALIUM : Theme is 'Dutiful’, 'Hard working’

Kali Phos : The theme is "Duty to keep friends & duty to study”
that means the child is very intelligent in studies and deep inside
in his heart there is a desire to study and keep friends, to go to
meet relatives.

MAGNESIUM : The theme is "Fear to lose the relationship and
aversion to quarrelling." He hates quarrelling because he doesn't
want to spoil the relationship.

1. Mag Sulph : He never speaks before his wife's back
because he fears that she would leave him.

2. -Mag. Phos. : Never quarrels with friends/relatives because



--- Page 175 ---
Homoeopathy and Mind

‘he doesn't want to spoil the relationship, that they will leave him.
3. Mag. Mur : Aversion to quarrel, peace loving. Fearful that
mother might desert him or get angry. Another important theme
is "Children of quarrelling parents." -

4. Mag. Carb: Orphans or grown up in orphan like conditions,
who have lost their childhood.

_~
<=
ay
ted
st)
a.
ie)
_o
°
e:
Oo.
<c
=
&
Oo
Ian's
o
ie)
”
(+)
~
[S)
=
s
c
2
oO
ie)
Yawe
[°)
ashe
Le
[e)
=
oan
oO
o
M2)
”
<


--- Page 176 ---
il

817467173

