
--- Page 1 ---
WHAT A HOMOEOPATH
SHOULD KNOW

DR. J. B. D'Castro

Z35
a ff Pht in we



--- Page 2 ---
WHAT A HOMOEOPATH
~ SHOULD KNOW

BEFORE
ESCRIBING?

y

Dr. J. Benedict D’Castro

B. JAIN PUBLISHERS (PVT.) LTD


--- Page 3 ---
md

Note from the publishers
Any information given in this book is not intended to be taken as a
replacement for medical advice. Any person with a condition
_ requiring medical attention should consult a quali ified
practitioner or therapeutist.

First Edition 1998

© Copyright with the Author
All rights are reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, mecnanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publishers.

Price : Rs.70/-

Published by :
B. Jain Publishers (P) Ltd.
1921, St. No. 10, Chuna Mandi,
Paharganj, New Delhi-110052 INDIA -
Phones: 7770430, 7770572, 7536418 —

Printed in India by -
Unisons Techno Financial Consultants (P) Ltd.
522, FIE, Patpar Ganj, Delhi - 110092.
Phone : 2169633

ISBN - 81-7021-871-3 -
Book Code : 5327 ©


--- Page 4 ---
Note from the publishers
Any information given in this book is not intended to be taken as a
replacement for medical advice. Any person with a condition
requiring medical attention should consult a qualified
practitioner or therapeutist,

First Edition 1998

© Copyright with the Author
All rights are reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publishers.

Price: Rs.70/-

Published by :
B. Jain Publishers (P) Ltd.
1921, St. No. 10, Chuna Mandi,
Paharganj, New Delhi-110052 INDIA -
Phones: 7770430, 7770572, 7536418

Printed in India by :
Unisons Techno Financial Consultants (P) Ltd.
522, FIE, Patpar Ganj, Delhi - 110092.
Phone : 2169633

ISBN - 81-7021-871-3
Book Code : 5327

a al


--- Page 5 ---
PREFACE

It is about two years since Dr. Seema Nayyar, a young,
energetic, willing worker and Sr. House Physician of the In-
stitute of Post Graduate Homoeopathic Medical Education
and Research had taken up the task of helping me in the
compilation of the said book. Dr. Meera, the Principal of
the Institute spared time from her busy schedule to make the .
necessary placement and corrections. And above all Dr. Anita
Goyal, Dr. Anju Kalia and Dr. Gifty (Sr. House Physicians of
the Institute) got themselves intimately involved with the task
of Computerising the manuscript version of the entire book.
It broke their hearts, when one morning at the fag end of the
work, to observe that some mischievious elements had erased
the complete philosophical part of the book thereby depriving
us of sending the promised floppy to the publishers. Without
their sincere co-operation and zeal, this book would not have
seen the light of the day.

I wish them all success in their earnestness as
Homoeopaths.

Dr. J. Benedict D’ Castro



--- Page 6 ---
INTRODUCTION

One may wonder when one reads from the organon of medicine
that opium given during the chill stage of intermittent fever will
quickly deprive the patient of his life and that the oxalic acid given
in globules (in which normally homoecopathic medicines are dis-
pensed with) will lead to stone formation in the kidneys and that it
should, therefore, be dispensed in liquid.

We are always in doubt whether or not an article of diet (say
beer) demanded by the patient be allowed or not. Kent advises us to
allow it because it is the demand of the body and needed for the
patient. Anyone taking medicine from Kali. group should abstain
from sexual intercourse. :

Allium sativa(garlic) which otherwise forms a part of our r diet,
in homoeopathic preparation, should not be given without care in
tuberculosis as it would encourage haemoptysis and arterial hyper-
tension.

Many such restrictions, permission, clarifications and guide-
lines with regard to certain condition (tuberculosis) and certain con-
stitutions (hydrogenoid) can be found in this book. When to give the
medicine that is indicated and when not to give it but to find other
suitable medicine (when coff. is indicated in coffee drinkers give
cham.) and when a suitable medicine fails to give the required result
or what medicine is to be given before giving the indicated one to
make it act (e.g. in a case of cancer for which Ars. alb. is indicated
a dose of carcinocin should be given first to make Ars alb work).
These and many other hints (such as the value of record keeping)
which a homoecopath must know before making a prescription, will
be found in this book which will help the homoeopaths to practice
Homoeopathy with the requisite knowledge and avoid adding more

vii


--- Page 7 ---
INTRODUCTION

suffering to the already suffering humanity by providing, them full
benefit of Homoeopathic system.

This book contains two parts. The first part contains (philo-
sophical part) “taken from Kent’s lesser writings” and the second
part (practical part) taken from various other books.

Time is short, patient may not have much of time at his dis-
posal. But at the same time a wrong medicine will only do him
harm. While dealing with a particular (so called) disease, do not
hesitate to refer to the disease concerned under the chapter "Dis-
ease" and while dealing with the medicine refer to the medicine con-
cermed under the chapters "General directions" and "Cautions" given
in this book. Prescribe the medicine only then. Thus follow the guide
lines given by our masters :-

“Go fast but slowly.”

Dr. J. Benedict D’ Castro


--- Page 8 ---
CONTENTS
PART - I

‘PHILOSOPHICAL PART

SECOND PRESCRIPTION. ~
PROPER TIME TO CHANGE..
THE UNDEVELOPED CASES.
WAIT AND OBSERVE.
IMPROPER ACTION.
- REMEDIES SUITABLE TO FOLLOW.
CAREFUL RECORDS.
SERIES OF DEGREES.
HOW SYMPTOMS CHANGE.
10. WHAT SHALL WE DO-WHEN THE LAW FAILS.
ae AVOID HASTE.

BAA AY FW DN

PART - II
CLINICAL HINTS.
1. HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION.
2. - DISEASES.
3. ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES.
4. CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON’TS
5. CONTRAINDICATIONS.

ix

Page

15
17
19
21
23
27
29
33

37

65
145
147
171



--- Page 9 ---
-6. ALTERNATION OF STATES.
7. ATAGLANCE.

II.
I,
IV.

VI.
VIL.
VI.
IX.
X,
XI.
XIl.
XIl.
XIV.

Some glaring mental symptoms.
Peculiar symptoms.

Out of proportion symptoms.
Thirst

Thirstlessness

Rare symptoms.

Cough distinctions.

Strange symptoms.

Looks and feelings differentiated.
Personalitics in homocopathy.
Ailments since remote events.
Remedies of oppositie modalities.

Homoeopathic substitute-for allopathic drugs.

Relationship.

8. TRIOS OF REMEDIES.
9. DUO’S OF REMEDIES.

175
18]
18]
182

183

183

184

184
186
186

- 187

188

192

192 .
194

195

197


--- Page 10 ---
PART - I

PHILOSOPHICAL PART

SECOND PRESCRIPTION.

PROPER TIME TO CHANGE.

THE UNDEVELOPED CASES.

WAIT AND OBSERVE.

IMPROPER ACTION.

REMEDIES SUITABLE TO FOLLOW.
CAREFUL RECORDS.

SERIES OF DEGREES.

_ HOW SYMPTOMS CHANGE.

10. WHAT SHALL WE DO WHEN THE LAW FAILS.
11. AVOID HASTE

Coen nan Y FF Wn

15
17

21

23

27
29.
33


--- Page 11 ---
Philosophical Part

SECOND PERSCRIPTION

What is more beautiful to look upon than the bud during its
hourly changes to the rose in tts bloom. This evolution has so often
come to my mind when patiently awaiting the return of symptoms
after the first prescription has exhausted its curative power. The
~ return of symptoms image unfolds the knowledge by which we know
whether the first prescription was the specific or the palliative ie.,
we may know whether the remedy was deep enough to -cure all the’
deranged vital wrongs or simply a superficially acting remedy, ca-
pable of only a temporary effect. The many things learned by the
action of the first remedy determine the kind of demand made upon,
the physician for the second prescription.

Many problems come up to be solved, that must be solved, or
failure may follow.

How long shall I watch and wait.? It is a question frequently
asked but seldom answered.

Is the remedy still acting.? Is the vital reaction still affected by
the impulse of the remedy.?

If the symptoms are returning, how long shall they be watched
before it is necessary to act or give medicine.?

Is the disease acute or chronic.?

Why is the second prescription so much more difficult than the
first.? Why is it that so many patients are benefited when first going
to physician and thereafter derive no benefit.? :

I presume that most good prescribers will say; we have often
acted too soon, but never waited too long” Many physicians fail

3


--- Page 12 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

because of not waiting, and yet the waiting must be governed by
: knowledge. Knowledge must be had, but where can it be obtained.?
To know this waiting is right, is quite different from waiting with-
out fixed purpose. This knowledge cannot be found where its exist-
ence is denied. It 1s not found with unbelievers and agnostics.
When the first prescription has been made and the remedy has
been made similar enough to change the existing image we have but
to wait for results. The manner of change taking place in the totality
of symptoms signifies everything, yet the manner of the return of
the image, provided it has disappeared, signifies more : FIRST : If
aggravation of Symptoms follow; SECOND : If amelioration of
symptoms follow; :
1. Aggravation of existing symptoms may come on with general
improvement of the patient, which means well; but if aggrava-
~ tion of the symptoms is attended with decline of the patient the
cure is doubtful, and the case must be handled with extreme
. : care, as it is seldom that such patients recover perfectly. .
2. If amelioration follow the prescription, to what does the ame-
horation apply.?

It may apply to general state or but to few symptoms. If the
patient does not feel the elasticity of the life returning, the improved
symptoms are the facts upon which to doubt recovery.

The knowledge that the disease is incurable often is obtained
only in this way. In such cases, every remedy may palliate his suf-
ferings but cure does not come. The symptoms that are the expres--
‘sions of the debility are there, and hence the totality of symptoms is
not removed.

After the curative impulse has entirely subsided, the symptoms .
will appear one by one, falling into place to arrange an image of the
disease before the intelligent physician for the purpose of cure.

If the first prescription has been continously given, there has
been but little if any chance of a pure returning image of the disease, .
therefore this image must be very unreliable

4


--- Page 13 ---
SECOND PRESCRIPTION

When the remedy has been fully exhausted, then, and only then,
can we trust the symptoms constituting the picture.

If the first prescription was the simillimum the symptoms will
return, and when they return asking for the same remedy.

_ Too oftén the remedy has been only similar enough to the su-
perficial symptoms to change the totality and the image comes back
changed, therefore, resembling another remedy, which must always
be regarded as a misfortune, by which the case is sometimes spoiled,
and the hand of a master may fail to correct the wrong done.

Whenever the symptoms return in the same image, calling for
the same remedy, when it is that we have demonstrated, that for a
time, if the disease be chronic, we have but to command the range
of dynamics to cure this case. This rule is almost free from excep-
tions if the remedy is antipsoric.

What must the physician do who has not the knowledge of dy-
namic medicines.? He must sometimes see sick images come back
without change of symptoms, though I believe it is seldom.

The symptoms may call for Phos..as strongly as when he be-
gan, and Phos. 6x. has served and no longer cures. What can he do
but change his remedy.?

Can it be possible that man can be so ignorant of how to cure as
to give a drug that is not indicated because the one that is indicated
does not cure.?

These ignorant mortals condemn the system of homocopathy,
and feel that they have performed their duty to the sick, forgetting
that ignorasce was the culprit.

I have observed in cases where a low potency had been admin-
istered in frequently repeated doses, that sometime must elapse be-
fore a perfect action will follow the higher potency; but where the
dose has not been repeated after its action was first observed, the
new and higher potency will act promptly.

When the symptoms come back after prudent waiting, unchanged
the selection was correct, and if the same potency fails to act, a

5


--- Page 14 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

higher one will generally do so quite promptly, as did lower one at
first. When the picture comes back unaltered except by the absence
of some one or more symptoms, and no new symptoms, the remedy
should never be changed until a still higher potency has been fully
tested, as no harm can come to a case from giving a single dose of a
medicine that has exhausted it's curative powers; it is even negli-
gence not to do just this thing.


--- Page 15 ---
PROPER TIME TO CHANGE
THE PRESCRIPTION

7AVhen the demonstration is clear that the present remedy has
done all it is capable of doing; and this demonstration cannot be
made until much higher potencies than usually made have been tried,
then the time is present for the next prescription.

To change the next remedy becomes a ponderous problem, and
what shall it be.?

The last appearing symptom shall be the guide to the next rem-
edy. This is so whenever the image has been permitted to settle by
watching and waiting for the shaping of the returning symptom
picture, Long have I waited after exhausting the power of a remedy,
while observing a few of the old symptoms returning, finally a new
symptom appears. This latest symptom will appear in the anamne-
sis as best related to some medicine having it as a characteristic
which most likely have all the rest of the symptoms.

It is not supposed that this later appearing symptom is an old
symptom on its way to final departure; for so long as old symptoms
reappear and disappear, it is granted that no medicine is to be thought
of.

ad «

‘It is an error to think of a medicine when a symptom image is
“ Shanging; the physician must wait for the permanency or firmness
in the relations of the image before making a prescription.

Some say: “ I must give the patient medicine or he will go and
see someone else. “I have only to say that it were better had all sick
folks gone somewhere else, for these doctors seldom cure but often
complicate the sickness.


--- Page 16 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

The acute expressions of a chronic disease have a different.
management from the acute disease, e.g.a child suffers from bron- ‘'
chitis every change of weather. It may grow worse and worse if
* treated with a remedy for the acute symptoms. ;

The miasm that predisposes the child to recurrent attacks must ©
be considered.

One recently under my care had received Ant.-t., Calc., Sulph.,
Lyc., etc., in such indiscriminate confusion that the child was not
cured. The waiting on sac-lac. through several attacks permitted
the drug effects to pass off and the true image of the sickness was
permitted to express itself through several of the exacerbations
taken as a whole.

When western ague is complicated with a miasm, a single par-
oxysm does not fully express the totality, but several must be grouped
- and the true image will be aiscovered. If the acute disease be un-
complicated with a miagm, the indicated remedy will wipe it out
“cito, tuto et jucunde/


--- Page 17 ---
THE UNDEVELOPED CASE — i

In paragraph 173, Hahnemann’s organon, it is strongly inti-
mated that the “partial (one-sided)” case is often a hard thing to
manage. It is often quite impossible to find a curative remedy where
there is but one expression of the disease and that one a pathologi- °
cal or objective symptom. Previous symptom being suppressed and ~
the only expression now in sight or obtainable is the so called “local
disease. “I am asked almost everyday what to do when there is a
local disease and no symptoms. As a matter of fact I seldom see
such a state. But such a state may and does exist wherein there is
’ nothing peculiar to prescribe on and there are no concomitants guid-_
ing to a remedy. The expert will nearly always see some peculiar
thing in the patient to prescribe on, which prescription will gener-
ally be followed by the development of the prehistoric symptoms. If
the patient can be talked to relate in his own way some old symp-
toms of years ago, or some symptoms that existed previous to some
attack of acute disease, this may furnish a guide to a prescription
that will cure or develop the latent disease. When the patient tells
me that he has suffered from the present undefined “one-sided” ail-
ment ever since he had an acute attack of any given disease, Carbo-
v., very high, a single dose, will be followed after a month or two
with the cure of the present disease or a development of the original
true expression. Where a peculiar “one-sided” expression presents
in a single symptom which is peculiar to no proved drug, it becomes:
necessary to develop the disease before it can be cured. Sulph. may
develop symptoms that correctly express the demand for the
simillimum, if not, Cale-carb. should follow, and in turn Lyco.,
always giving ample time for the last remedy to exhaust its action.
Psor. should be given ona similar absence of clear indications.

9:


--- Page 18 ---
+

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

This is what experience teaches in the management of {atent psora.
I have prescribed in this manner and restored many a sickly dwarf
to help without ever being able to measure the obscure pathology or

_ effect a diagnosis of his complaint. The pathological state contains

very little to guide to a remedy. To prescribe Si/. for fistula-in-ano 1s

an insult to homoeopathy as much as to prescribe for pain in the
~~ stomach, diarrhoea, or headache. Who dares to say that a carci-
~ noma could not be permanently cured with Chamomilla, When the
~ malignant growth has come, the symptoms necessary to make a

correct prescription have gone, and very little is now seen but the
mass or morbid anatomy, and the damnable local treatment has so
changed the totality that the individuality of the disease is lost, and
the disease becomes masked by the pathology. The time necessary
to work this case back to the prehistoric symptoms cannot be had,
as the pathological evolutions are too rapid. In this case the patients
life can only be saved when the keynote of the prehistoric identity 1s
expressed in some two or three symptoms manifested in the morbid
mass that too persistent to be suppressed by the meddling. Such has
been the case in a few instances of reported cases of cancer.

There are a few deep acting remedies which experience has dem-
onstrated to be useful in developing these “one-sided” cases and
bringing back the original symptoms in non-malignant diseases.
Sepia will often bring back the original symptoms of an intermittent
fever when the case has been spoiled and the symptoms are not the
true expression of the disease, because of the various remedies pre-
scribed inappropriately. These “one-sided” cases seldom occur pri-
marily. By this I mean that when a disease has not been treated
inappropriately, it will express itself in the features of a perfect and
natural picture, generally known and recognised by every hard work-
ing prescriber.

It is commonly spoken by the superficial observer that a localised
inflammation is the local disease per se, because there are no symp-
toms of a constitutional disease. It is a very common thing to see
this so called local disease alternate with cough, pain in the back,

10


--- Page 19 ---
NN

THE UNDEVELOPED CASE

and other circumscribed evidence of psora; and still this superficial
observer learns no lesson and continues in his deception, for such it
is, and a double one, as he deceives both himself and his patient. To
treat these * one-sided” diseases, it is necessary to take the symp-
toms of cach separate manifestation in perfect expressions, and the
totality will express the individuality of diseasc. These separate and
distinct localisations may be years apart and there exist a long pe-
riod of so called health. So far apart are these one-sided expressions
that they are not supposed to be connected unless the physician is
conversant with all the peculiar habits of psora. In an artificial way
we have an example of one sided diseases in the seton. I have seen a
host of symptoms depart soon after the issue began to suppurate. I
might as well prescribe for that scton as to prescribe for the disease
in the absence of its natural expressions. Would any sane man call
this issue local disease.? Not long ago, I was treating a man for
stomach symptoms. He had always been treated in the old way and
it was with difficulty that I could urge him to express his symptoms.
Finally | gave him entire relicf from his so-called dyspepsia and
behold ! he got conjuctivitis with paralysis of the lid of the left eye
with dimness of vision as though looking through a gauze. Caust.
corresponds to the eye symptoms and the stomach symptoms which
I supposed I had cured, and cured permanently. One of our St. Louis
occulists had suppressed this conjunctivitis four times, believing it
was a local disease. The importance of including the cured symp-
toms in the last remedy is quite visible. If this is not done the old
symptoms may return. One fortunate thing is, that the new symp-
toms usually correspond to a remedy having the old one’s.
However, if the choice is difficult the old symptoms are of great
help.

Over a year ago a gentleman consulted me, saying that he was
rapidly losing his eye-sight. He had changed glasses several times
and the occulist had failed to benefit him and he feared blindness.
He had been forced to give up his business, which was book-keep-
ing. Nothing about the eye revealed the cause of eye-sight. The rest,

1


--- Page 20 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

therefore, had not helped him. He complained of no symptoms at
present, but ten years previously he suppressed a chill by quinine.

The symptoms of that attack seemed to me like Carb-v. and I
had nothing else to base a prescription on, as there was no guiding
symptoms in the threatened blindness. He got Carbo-v. 76m. Fincke
one dose, and immediate improvement followed in his vision. He
took a violent cold that developed Phos. symptoms in the chest, and
one dose of that remedy, 5m, restored him to health and also fin-
ished the case as to his sight. Another evidence of the complemen-
tary relations of Carbo-v. and Phos. in undeveloped cases.

Disease of psoric nature may present alternating manifestations
where any one of the manifestations may be considered by the su-
perficial observer as a distinct acute disease. Diarrhoea may exist
for several days and stop suddenly and rheumatism come on. While
the characteristics are not indication of the remedy 1n either of these
expressions, this peculiar order of expression will nearly always
find its remedy in Abrotanum. It is often a difficult matter to pre-
scribe correctly on the one or two symptoms found in the localized
expression, but by an appropriate prescription for the “one-sided” —
expression, the other side may develop, and the new, necessarily
changed, prescription, including the old symptoms, will most likely
change the alternation habit and cure or develop simpler expres-
sions of the disease.

Thus we trace back to the original or primary simple disease or
complexity of symptoms that none but the experienced should at-
tempt to treat. Incautious prescribing, repeating, medicine in inap-
propriate potencies, can never unravel such cases. Every dose must
be permitted to finish its action, as very often it is necessary to
secure the effect of the secondary action of a given remedy in the
finest detail of its tapering off properties. It will often be observed
with Calc., Sulph., Graph., and all of that class of remedies, that
the highest order of curative effect is secured in the fourth, fifth,
and sixth week, and even much later.

12


--- Page 21 ---
NN

' THE UNDEVELOPED CASE

To understand these “one-sided” disease expressions and be
successful in their management the physician must accept as truth
that they are all constitutional and of psoric origin. He who looks

_upon them as local disease is a curse to such patients as he is per-
“i mitted to treat. Every time a so called local disease is driven back, it
“is that much harder to reach with correct prescribing.

It is a sorry fact that many such men claim to be Homoeopaths,
and do untold injury to the system of medicine they so poorly com-
prehend and so imperfectly follow.

13



--- Page 22 ---
WAIT AND OBSERVE

The first prescription may not have been a well chosen medi-
cine and then it becomes necessary to make a second effort.

As time brings about the re-examination of the patient, new
facts are brought out in relation to the image of the sickness, indi-
cating that the first medicine had not been suitable, perhaps several
weeks have passed and the re-examination finds no change in the
symptoms.

Shall I compare all the facts in the case to reassure myself of
_ the correctness of the first prescription, or shall I wait longer.?

Yes, to the former, of course, and if the remedy still is the most
similar of all the symptoms, wait and watch and study the patient
for a new light on his feelings to which he has become so accus-
tomed, he has not observed.

Commonly, the new study of the case will reveal the reason
why the first prescription has not cured; it was not appropriate.

If it still appears to be the most similar remedy the question
arises, “how long shall I wait.”?

At this point it should be duly appreciated that the length of
time is not so important as being on the safe side, and “wait” is the
only safe thing to do. It may have been many days, but that matters _
not, wait longer.

The finest curative action I ever observed had begun sixty days
after the administration of the single dose.

The curative action may begin as late as a long acting drug can
—* produce symptoms on a healthy body. This guide has never been
_. thought of by our writers, but it is well to be considered.

15


--- Page 23 ---
v

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Why not.?

It is the practice for some to go lower if a high potency has
failed. fs

This method has but few recorded successes but should not be
_ Ignored.

The Question next to be considered is the giving of a dose of
medicine in water and in divided doses. This has at times seemed to
have found favour over the single dose dry. This is open for discus-
sion, requiring testimony of the many, not of few, to g-ve it weight.
The best reports are made from both methods, and both are in har-
mony with correct practice. ,

16



--- Page 24 ---
IMPROPER ACTION

The next important step to be considered is when the first pre-
scription has acted improperly, or without curative results. Then it
becomes necessary to consider a second prescription. The first pre-
scription some times changes the symptoms that are harmless and
painless, into symptoms that are dangerous and painful.

If a rheumatism of the knee goes to heart under a remedy
prescribed for the one symptom, the remedy has done harm; it is an
unfortunate prescription and must be antidoted. In incurable dis-

_ eases when the remedy has set up destructive symptoms, an an-
_ tidote must be considered.

If, the remedy changes the general symptom image and the gen-
eral state of patient is growing worse, the question then comes up.
Was the prescription only similar to a part of the image, or is the
discase incurable. ?Knowledge of disease may settle this question.
If the disease is incurable, the action of the remedy, was not ex-
pected to do more than to change the sufferings into peaceful symp-
toms, and the second prescription is to be considered only when
new sufferings demand a remedy.

But suppase such a change of suffering comes after the first
prescription and the disease is undoubtly curable, then the conclu-
sion must be that the first prescription was not the true specific, and
that the true image has not been seen.

Wait until the old image has fully returned, is all there is to be.

It is hazardous practice to follow up rapidly all the changing
symptom in any sickness, with remedies that simply for the moment
seem similar to the symptom present. The observing physician will
know by the symptoms and their directions, whether the patient is

17


--- Page 25 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

growing better or worse, even though he appears to the contrary to
himself and friends.

The complaints of patient or friends constitute no ground for a
second prescription. The greatest sufferings may intervenc in the
change of symptoms during progress or permanent recovery, and if
such symptoms are disturbed by a new prescription or palliated by
inappropriate medicine, the patient may never be cured.

The object of the first prescription is to arrange the vital current
or motion in a direction favourable to equilibrrum, and when this is
attained it must not be disturbed by a new interference. Ignorance in
this sphere has cost millions of lives.

When will the medical world be willing to learn these principles
so well that they can cure speedily, gently and permanently.

There can be no fixed time for making the second prescription;
it may be many months.

The second prescription must be one that has a friendly relation
to the last one or the preceeding. No intelligent prescription can be

made without knowing the last remedy. Concordances in

Boenninghausen must not be ignored. The new remedy should sus-
tain a complementary relation to the former.

18


--- Page 26 ---
REMEDIES SUITABLE TO FOLLOW

In managing a chronic sickness the remedy that conforms to an
acute experression of the illness is worth knowing, as very often its
chronic may be just the one that conforms to the symptoms.

Calcarea is the natural chronic of Bell and Rhus-tox. Nat-mur
sustains the same relation to Apis and Ignatia; Sil. to Puls.; Sul-
phur to Aconite.

When Pulsatilla has been of great service in a given case and
finally cures no longer but the symptoms now point to Silicea, the
latter will be given with confidence as its complementary relation
has long been established. While on the other hand Causticum and
Phos, do not like to work after each other, nor will Apis do well
after Rhus-t.

How physician can make the second prescription without re-
gard to the experience of neariy a century, is more than man can
know.

These things are not written to instruct men of experience in the
ight way, but the young man who have asked so often for the above
notes of our present practice.

Iam told almost daily that this kind of practice is splitting hairs,
but Iam convinced of the necessity of obeying every injunction.

19


--- Page 27 ---
CAREFUL RECORDS

You should have no confidence in the experience of men who do
not write out faithfully all the symptoms of patients treated, and
note carefully the remedy and how given; especially is this neces-
sary in patients likely to need a second prescription.

The Physician who has in his case-book the notes of every ill-
ness of his patients has wonderful hold of any community. He has
the old symptoms and the remedies noted that cure, and he can make
indirect inquiry after all the old symptoms long ago removed.

The pleasure is not small found in consulting such a note book.

Experience soon leads the close prescriber to note alf the pecu- .
liar symptoms and to omit the non-descript wanderings indulged by
sick people; however, it is important to be correct in judgement.

Many phsicians make a first correct prescription and the pa-
tient does well and cheers up for a while, but finally the test 1s made
for second and then all is lost. Homoeopathy is nothing if not true
and, if true, the greatest accuracy of detail and method should be
followed. It is fortunate that the physicians who repeat while the
medicine is acting are such poor pescribers, or their death list would
be enormsus.

21


--- Page 28 ---
SERIES OF DEGREES

This opens up the consideration of series of degrees, which is to
become one of the most important subjects in the treatment of chronic
diseases. It will lead to the development of a distinct class of pre-
scribers in our school, if it has not already done so. Its recognition
is a distinctive feature in the pratice of my pupils, many of whom
have expressed their wonder that this doctrine of Hahnemann is so
meagerly understood and so rarely used in the treatment of chronic,
diseases.

Tt has often been forced upon my attention when observing thé:
work of even careful prescribers, that they stop after making a most’
careful selection, and fail to do more than to start the cure in the’
right direction. The patient improves so long as the one potency will’
act curatively, and then the cure stops; yet the same remedy is indi-:
cated, know from the fact that the symptoms have returned and are
the same as when the remedy was first given. I have noticed many’
times, in patients coming to me from physicians who always give a
low potency, that same curative action was observed and then the
remedy was changed and again other changes were made. When the.
correct remedy was given in a higher potency the cure began again.
It is same when the physician has given a high potency, and it has
done all it can do, or will no longer act; another remedy has been
selected which failed because it was not indicated. The one that was”
indicated has failed only because it has done all it can do in the one
potency. The physician must learn that he cannot practice’
homoeopathy on one potency of each drug.

Many men always give a low potency, others always use the 30th;
others the 200th; others always use someone of the very high potencies. :
It-1s to show a better way that this paper has been prepared. -


--- Page 29 ---
ieee

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Whatever potency a physician uses that one potericy is not suf-
ficient for chronic diseases. It will generally do for the acute sick-
ness. Many chronic sickness are cured by keeping a patient under
the influence of the one indicated remedy for two or more years. But
this cannot be done, with continous curative action, unless the doc-
trine of series in degrees is fully understood and used.

As there are “Octaves” of musical tones so there are octaves in
the simple substance, through which, severally, it is possible to cor-
respond with the various planes of the interior organism of the ani-
mal cells. If l take Nat-c. in crude form until I am sick, and have all
or many of the symptoms that belong to it and are found in its patho-
genesis. I there rest. Now if Mr. Jones comes to me with the symp-
toms precisely resembling those in the pathogenesis of Nat-c. and I
give him Nat-c. in the same crude form that made me sick, it will
make him. worse. It will not sure him quickly and gently but will
aggravate his disorder and suffering. However, if I have learned
that all drugs have precisely an opposite action when much diluted
from that they have when used in crude form, I will give him Nat-c.
in a diluted form to secure the very opposite of curative action,
against illustration of changes denoting the first, the lowest or out-
most degrees.

Now I affirm that there are more striking efforts of degrees as
we go higher in the scale of potencies. I have observed many thou-
sand times that all potencies act when the remedy is indicated:

That any ptoency will act two or more doses at long intervals:

That then a change must be made; and my experience has led
me to go upward in the scale instead of downward.

Many times my patients have been able to specify the powder
that had their medicine in it.

After a given potency has acted curatively the usual time, and
then no longer helps, and the symptoms return calling for the same

remedy, I go higher; then my patient tells me that was the “same”
remedy I had given in the first place. What better test can we have

24


--- Page 30 ---
SERIES OF DEGREES

that a remedy is acting. I always know my remedy is curing wheii
my patient returns and tells me she is feeling so much better, her-
‘~ self.

| Thave often heard physicians tell me that it was due to sugges-

“tions that my medicine acted so well; but my answer to this is, that
I suggest just as strongly with the wrong remedy as with the right
one and my patient improves only when they have received the simi-
lar or correct remedy.

After thirty years of active practice as a homoeopath, I find that

I require all deep acting remedies in the 30th, 200th, 1000th and

100m. and often need the dm and the mm. I am able to discover a
_ vast difference in the action of these various potencies.

I once used potencies that ranged nearer to each other but re-
peatedly found that the degrees must be far enough apart to repre-
sent an octave, or failure followed. I observed that after the good
action of 200th after waiting until it was no longer active, although
I gave 300, 500, and 800, the 1m acted much more strongly and the
300 or 500 generally failed. After much experience I settled upon
the degrees that [ have mentioned. About twenty years ago I found
myself in possession of nearly a full set of fincke potencies includ-
ing the 45m and cm and many between these numbers. Frequently |
gave the 45m with excellent results but after it had done all it would,
I would give 80m or 73m or a 60m with failure but nearly always
the cm would work the 45m had done, and my patients often said
that the cm worked as did the 45m of course not knowing the rem-
edy not the potency. The remark expressed the patients measure of
the action.

Many times I used to give first a cm but found that when then
going lower the action was seldom so strong as when climbing up-
ward. Again, I often observed sharp aggravation when beginning
the cm, but seldom observed sharp aggravation when beginning low
im relation to the sensitiveness of my patient’s nature. Of late years,
T always begin with lower and gradually go higher and thereby avoid

25


--- Page 31 ---
shocking even the very sensitive women and children. An extremely.
sensitive woman will receive in the beginning, for a chronic condi-
tion, the 30th or 200th then followed by higher potencies, while not
so sensitive receive the 10m to begin and then the higher, as the case
progresses towards recovery.

After long observation in the range of potencies, goes up and.
going down, I have settled upon the octaves in the series of degrees
as 30th, 200th, Im, 10m, 50m, cm, dm, and mm. Many of my,
patient’s records indicate that the patient has steadily improved af-
ter each potency to the highest with symptoms becoming fainter and
he himself growing stronger, mentally and physically.

It is not an uncommon recital in the record that the patient con-
tinues to improve on each potency for three or four months. Any
physician who learns to use these degrees in chtonic diseases pos-
sesses untold advantages over the physician with his one potency.

26


--- Page 32 ---
HOW SYMPTOMS CHANGE

EDITORS HOMOEOPATHIC PHYSICIAN : For the interest
of the members of the Rochester Hahnemannian society, I desire to
comment on the page related by Dr. Brant to the Society, and pub-
lished in HOMOEOPATHIC PHYSICIAN, October, page 538,
last line, where the -doctor gave Stannum. He notes that the patient
came back and stated that the sputa had changed in the taste to
“salty”. Stannum has the salty taste as well as sweetish, and it is
very common for a drug to convert one symptom into another within

_its own sphere in curing. [f it converts the symptoms into one not
within its own sphere the cure will be slow or prove to be not a cure.

When a patient returns and reports symptoms worse or changed,
it is proper to look to sec if the new symptoms are found under the
medicine taken. If they are found there the prescription is a good
one and the physician may say to himself, Sac. Lac. If the new
symptoms are not found in the search into the same proving there
are two conclusions to be settled by waiting :

1. The case may need another remedy.

2. Ifthe case goes on to quick recovery it will be found that
the new symptom or symptoms will some day belong to the
pathogenetic symptoms.

The cultivation of this watchfulness leads to great accuracy in
prescribing, as much will be gleaned that comes under useful know]-
edge. The field is a very large one and the field of high potencies is
especially a fertile one. Observing what develops in the aggravation
of high potencies and the direction of the symptoms is the grandest
study in the materia-medica.

27


--- Page 33 ---
WHAT SHALL WE DO WHEN
THE LAW FAILS.

“What shall we do when the law fails.?” said Dr. Snow. One
lay when I met him retuming from a patient whom he had just
visited. But said I “the law is not so changeable a thing as to fail
oday and succeed tomorrow; it cannot fail. If you have demon-
_ strated that you have a curable case, the law is always equal to the
- emergency; if all embracing and positive.”

-. But says Dr. Snow; I administered Bry. in a case of pneumonia
~ and it has cured the patient; I know it was indicated.” Now my dear
_ doctor I have known the law a long time and never knew it to fail,
: indeed I have discovered nothing fallible in it. On the other hand,
~ you my dear doctor, have been known to fail in your selection very
~ often; you have exhibited so many demonstrations of fallibility that
one can but believe that your Bry. was not indicated. You must -
realise my dear doctor that the law is a perfect law or it is no law at
all, and that in this perfect law there is no exception, and that
homoeopathy based upon that perfect law is an applied science and
that it is not homoeopathy unless the remedy is similar and curative.
The greatest master in the homoeopathic art of healing may give a
remedy that has no homocopathic relation to the given disease. The
remedy is not homoeopathic simply it is carried in the case of
homoeopathic physician. Then it is useless to say that many pre-
scriptions lack the homoeopathic relation necessary to a
homoeopathic prescription. But so often do we hear the expression
“ T have tried homoeopathy and it failed.” When as a matter of fact
the author of this common sentiment has simply demonstrated his
own failure to apply this all-embracing art. The man who says this
the loudest is most ignorant of what he professes. We are inclined to

29



--- Page 34 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

be patient with him who admits that the failure is on the part of
selection not related to the law. Man is a very fallible being, and
must make many errors: Neither would I debar any man from the
use of his selected implements; but when I hear the law abused,
when I listen to the shifting of blame from the shoulders of ignorant
and fallible man to the infallible law, | cannot keep my seat.

The student should learn what many older men have not learned
that failure to curable disease with homocopathic means rests upon
the selection, not the law or the remedy selected. How little must he
know about the “Art of healing” who finds it necessary to resort to
palliatives for the “majority” of his cases. It sounds wonderfully
wise to the ignorant to hear one condemn an infallible law because
he has failed to cure a most simple case with means having no known.
relation to the disease in hand. I have listened to this too frequently

to remain quiet any longer. I could rest, were these slanderous re-

marks from the open enemy, but they come from the impostors in
our midst, from men whom the people call homoeopathic physi-
cians. ~ oe .
“Where shall we learn this great and perfect law of cure?” It
would look well to begin with the grand old organon of Samuel
Hahnemann.

“But we have read Hahnemann’s organon. “Yes, you have read
but to laugh at it and rejected its doctrines, you have not obeyed the
commands contained there-in. you have come to a conclusion that
you are wiser than Hahnemann, and you have not exhibited any of
the masters success in curing the sick. Upon what do you base your
claim to superior wisdom, advancement or improvement? you scoff
at the organon without knowing its real contents and you laugh at
the master while you are doing a practice showing a much inferior
success. You sav Hahnemann ignored pathology. It looks strange
that a man who was able to show up the inconsistencies of the pa-
thology of his day should be said to ignore pathology; a man who
knew enough of it to know its weakness. Would that so much could

30


--- Page 35 ---
—

WHAT SHALL. WE DO WHEN THE LAW FAILS

be said of these latter day supporters of the hobby that has lead to
no tenets that has not been refuted in less than a decade.

Did Hahnemann ever discourage the study of disease? The man
that thinks so had better read the organon, in its several beginning
paragraphs and the dream will be dispelled.

The learning of homoeopathy second hand is mostly the cause

“: “of so much lack of success in applying the means that result in

homoeopathic cures when properly applied. A student goes out from
college with no philosophy, or a meagre false one from a professor
who has himself never read the organon but to laugh at it, to prac-
tice a modern homoeopathy that is said to be an improvement on the
old way, but finding that he cannot appiy his, new found friend in
emergencies falls back on quinine for chills, cathartics to unload the
bowels and morphine to relieve the pain. Is this an improvement or
is it a retrogression ? Hahnemann and his close followers never
have needed these things to cure the sick; but this so cailed modern
homoecopathy must have palliatives i even non surgica! difficul-
ties. What is said here can be proved and has been demonstrated to
many skeptical physicians to their entire satisfaction. My life is
devoted to the exhibition of these convincing proofs. The man who
sits down and sneers and says “I don’t believe” is not worth talking
to’ but the man who ts willing to learn, may learn to apply the law
so universally that a palliatives are useless ormaments in this office
and the potentized appropriate medicine 1s every where sufficient.
The man who says. this cannot be done because” I have tried it, “1s
not worth listening to, as his trial has but demonstrated his own
incompetence. As an argument against potentized medicines in
intermittents it has been asked: Will you sit down by the bed side of
a pernicious intermittent and try to hunt out your similar remedy
and let your patient die. ? “Now it is known that the pernicious
intermittent is a dangerous form, and in the south many of these
cases die with the best of means, and is it not as sensible to sit down
and wait even in this emergency, with our infallible law and bound-
less pathogenesis, as to continue to administer empirically a drug

31


--- Page 36 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

that has resulted in shocking failure and at the best a small prospect
of success. Yes I should sit down and hunt for the similar remedy
believing that the greatest good could come to my patient in so shorter
way. Yes, with even greater confidence than I ever had when in the
habit of giving thirty grains of quinine then I knew no better way
and I am charitable enough to believe this to be the fix of a large
number of candid practitioners-candid but with fixed ideas. To the
man who knows not the materia-medica this hunting for a remedy
looks like an enormous task; but a few years of correct reading, not
book-worming, so simplifies matters that the selection is generally
rapid in dangerous cases and emergencies. This work was performed
by the early homoeopathicians with meagre facilities. But now the
work is comparatively easy with our very complete repertories. In
times of epidemics the repertory should be carried with the physi-
cian. The fear that the family will be displeased is a fancy, as friends
are never displeased when success follows the prescription. The
success of the school, of each and every physician that accepts the
law, depends upon the correct following of the law or chaos is the
end. Great good can only come from the rigid adherence to the law
and the inductive method of Hahnemann. The law never fails when
it is properly invoked.

32


--- Page 37 ---
AVOID HASTE

Ofall things oppose haste in prescribing. In very grave diseases
haste 1s the common error, more frequently with the second pre-
scription than the first. Many doctors suppose that iphtheria de-
mands a medicine immediately because” something must be done.”
This is an error, many a life has been saved by waiting and watch-
ing.

For example :-

A little girl was suffering from severe attack of diphtheria and
- mother had treated it for four days with Merc-3 and Kali-bich. -3X

- jn alternation. She was poor and therefore I did not refuse to take
” the case which was then in a very bad state; nose, mouth and larynx
» full of exudation.

After a long study the child received Lyco. CM, one dose dry
which cleared out all the exudation from nose and fauces, but did
not touch the larynx.

I dare not tell you how long I watched that child before I saw an
indication for the second remedy which it would have never needed
had the Lyco. been given when the child first took sick. I waited
until the poor child was threatening dissolution when I saw a little
tough, yellow mucous in the mouth; Kali-bich. CM, one dose, cleared
the larynx in one day and there was no further indication necessary.

The first prescription is made with the entire image of the sick-
ness formed. People usually send for the doctor after there can be
no doubt of the sickness to be treated.

The doctor watches the improvement of the patient and the cor-
responding disappearance of the symptoms under the first

33


--- Page 38 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

prescription and when the case comes to a standstill, he is uneasy,
and with increasing fidgetiness he awaits the coming indications for
the next dose of medicine. Barer

This fidgetiness which comes from lack of knowledge unfits the
physician as an observer and judge of symptoms: hence we see the
doctor usually to cure his own children. He cannot wait and reason
clearly over the returning symptoms. ff

While watching the prescriptions of the beginners, I have ob-
served very often the proper result of the first prescription. The
patient has improved for a time, then ceased to respond to any rem-
edy.

Close investigation generally reveals the fact that this patient.
improved after the first dose of medicine, that the symptoms changed
slightly without new symptoms and the new “photo” seemed to call
for some other remedy, when of course, the remedy was changed
and trouble began: constant changing of remedies followed until all
the antipsorics in the chronic diseases had been given on flitting

_ symptom images, and the patient is yet sick. This is the common
experience of young Hahnemannians trying to find the right way.

Some of the expericnced make lesser blunders and some make

ee
few: but How many have made none All of these blunders, I have

4 made, as I feel I had no teacher, un dered upon the works of _
the great master.

f

34


--- Page 39 ---
YAW WN

CLINICAL HINTS.

HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION.
DISEASES.
ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES.
CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON’TS
CONTRAINDICATIONS.
ALTERNATION OF STATES
AT A GLANCE.

I. Some glaring mental symptoms.

II. — Peculiar symptoms.

ll. Out of proportion symptoms.

IV. Thirst.

V. — Thirstlessness

VI. Rare symptoms.

VII. Cough distinctions.

VI. Strange symptoms.

Xx. ~~ Looks and feclings differentiated.

X. _ Personalities in homoeopathy.

XI. .. Ailments since remote events.

'XIL Remedies of oppositie modalities.

XII. Homoeopathic substitute for allopathic drugs.

PART - I

XIV. Relationship.
8. TRIOS OF REMEDIES.
9. DUO’S OF REMEDIES.

35

37

65
145
147
171
175
181
18]
182
183
183
184
184
186
186
187
188
192
193
194
195
195
197



--- Page 40 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

prescription and when the case comes to a standstill, he is uneasy,
and with increasing fidgetiness he awaits the coming indications for
the next dose of medicine.

This fidgetiness which comes from lack of knowledge unfits the
physician as an observer and judge of symptoms; hence we see the
doctor usually to cure his own children. He cannot wait and reason
clearly over the returning symptoms. /

While watching the prescriptions of the beginners, I have ob-
served very often the proper result of the first prescription. The
patient has improved for a time, then ceased to respond to any rem-
edy.

Close investigation generally reveals the fact that this patient
improved after the first dose of medicine, that the symptoms changed
slightly without new symptoms and the new “photo” seemed to call
for some other remedy, when of course, the remedy was changed
and trouble began: constant changing of remedies followed until all
the antipsorics in the chronic diseases had been given on flitting
symptom images, and the patient is yet sick. This is the common
experience of young Hahnemannians trying to find the right way.

Some of the experienced make lesser landers and some make
_ few, but how many have made none. All of these blunders. ] have

made. as I fecl I had.ng teacher, until | blundered upon the works of _
the great master,

34



--- Page 41 ---
PART - II

ICAL HINTS.

CLIN

PEO! f=

ID

I.
IL.
III.
IV.
V.

VIL.

VII.

IX.
X.
XL.
XII.
XU

HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION
DISEASES.

ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES
CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON'TS
CONTRAINDICATIONS.
ALTERNATION OF STATES

AT A GLANCE.

Some glaring mental symptoms.
Peculiar symptoms.

Out of proportion symptoms.
Thirst.

Thirstlessness

Rare symptoms.

Cough distinctions.

Strange symptoms.

Looks and feclings differentiated
Personalities in homocopathy
Ailments since remote events
Remedies of oppositie modalities

Homoeopathic substitute for allopathic drugs.

XIV. Relationship.
8. TRIOS OF REMEDIES.
9. DUO’S OF REMEDIES.

|
|
|
Vi
|
|
|
|

35

37

65
145
147
17]
175
181
181
182
183
183
184
184
186
186
187
188
192
193
194
195
195
197


--- Page 42 ---
Physician must penetrate the inner recessés of symptomatol-
ogy. The very life of the patient must be opened. Learn the fear,
instincts, desires and aversions of the patient. If the prescription is
made on these, remedy crops out through the affections.

Physician who desires praise and sympathy for what le had
done generally has no conscience.

The things that relate to the memory and intelligence are fiot so
important as the things that relate to the affections or desires and
aversions.

When a person becomes sick, he becomes susceptible to a cer-
tain remedy which will affect him in its highest potency, while upon
a healthy person it will have no effect.

In cases without symptoms the patient must be kept on Sac.
Lac., until you can discern some general e.g. aggravation of symp-
toms in the morning or at mid-night. If the patient is only tired with-
out guiding symptoms you know that it is prone to terminate in
some grave disorder like consumption, bright’s disease, cancer or
the like.

SOME IMPORTANT : HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION
- Things that change the aspect of a case should be avoided.

- These most villianous doctors are always hunting for some-
thing strange and peculiar. Those out of the way symptoms and
strange pains are not what we prescribe on and will seldom serve
you. The generals are ruling symptoms and are what the patient
says, the individual himself.

37


--- Page 43 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

- | would impress on you that it is well to gather together all the
symptoms with their associations. It will not do to place much de-
pendence on one little symptom or even on two or three little symp-
toms. The symptoms of the whole case must be considered and then
if the key notes and characteristics and everything else cause the
remedy to be well rounded out and full and to look like the whole
patient only then is it suitable.

- Chronic cases cure when we recognise the fact of the long ~
years of existence of chronic cases, also that they are often inherited
for several generations. If a case is made in the course of two or
three years it is indeed a speedy cure. It takes for two to five years to
cure chronic diseases.

- Certain constitutions are mentioned in connection with a rem-.
edy as being suited to it, but it must not be inferred that no action
will result in other when the symptoms agree.

- Crude drugs aggravate the disease, while high potencies ag-
gravate the symptoms of the disease and do not engraft upon the
economy a drug disease, provided the remedy is repeated.

- Acure is not a cure unless it destroys the internal or dynamic
cause of disease. A tumor, if removed, does not cure the patient,
because its cause still continues to exist.

- A copious discharge protects many an individual:from changes
in organs. =~

DRESSING WOUNDS: Always protect surfaces that are ex-
posed and are raw and bleeding with something of a bland superfi-
cial character. Wound must be dressed with as simple a means as
possible and there is no simple dressing than Calendula one part to
four or six of water.

EXTERNAL APPLICATION : No application which are ca-
pable of doing anything can be used without injury. If so simple that
they do not change the symptoms they are of course useless.

38


--- Page 44 ---
™

HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION

Under any circumstances never make use of local application
for an internal derangement. It is the highest order of medical pro-
fanity.

The physician spoils his case, when he prescribes for the local
symptoms and neglects the patient’s °

ANODYNE : If given, as sure as, a hot poultice applied, you:
will fail with your femedies. The application of a poultice causes
increased determination of blood to the part and if suppuration takes
place it causes more breaking down of tissue.

The symptoms that arise from internal cause should be treated
with internal remedies and symptoms that arise from external cause,
when all that there is or the case is external; should be treated lo-
cally.

In other words for local causes use local means and for internal -
or dynamic cause use internal means. Let internal wrongs be treated
by the homoeopathic remedy and external or local conditions be
treated by such soothing dressings as are most comfortable.

The better the internal is in an incurable disease the worse the
external becomes, and when this is so the external trouble is essen-
tial to health and so long as the external manifestations are in the
extremities and the joints are being increasingly affected, so long
the internal is in a state of order.

The greatest comfort on earth to man in incurable diseases is :
Homoeopathy.

In incurable cases where there are extensive structural changes
use short acting medicines and such antipsorics which do not relate
to the case as it was in the beginning. The remedy that fits the pre-
vious condition will tear the case down.

In old incurable cases when we give a remedy that fits the whole
condition, the result is one of the three things; first aggravation of
the symptoms with advancement of the disease, second no actions,
and third euthanasia.

39


--- Page 45 ---
_ ASH ERESES es

When symptoms retum . there 18, hope, that 1 is. the, road to: gure
other. ~

aH UPGEU BOL
Th the infant we see the father’ 5 history, i in old age the historyia£}

youth. .This..enables _us.to look into future too, to, see whether a
patient will recover or die, or be, palliate

: THOU €
Absence of tears in four months old infant usually denotes fatal

Low potencies can“cure “eats diseases’ “because acute’ “disease g
att upon the outer most degree of the simple substance and the body.
In-chronic diseases the trouble’ is deeper seated and'the degrees ate’?
fine, hence the remedy must be reduced to finer or-higher degrees‘s6
as to be similar to the degrees of chronic diseases. (llso
is In case’ of encysted tabereles in: the lungs: ‘bevcareful not to
give “Hepar., Sil, Sulph.0 @0 08 8 ads cate. B10

~ Eycopodium is occasionally itidiGated in “the acute’ diseases! a

especially as an intercurrent remedy, its-symptoms ‘being present.“
“ *'Sometimes ‘Kali- c. “will bring on menses when * ‘Nat- m. “fails.

ey
Ne
+
A

jose is too large when. the man receives it as a. sickness.

“ey
» Large coses of homoeopathically suitable drugs are. certainhy.s
much more injurious than such as are given without any similar:
(homoeopathic) relation to the disease, or such as have an opposite
(antipathy) relation to the case, that is to say are quite unsuitable ;
(allopathic). In the homoeopathic employment of medicine where |
the totality of the morbid symptoms has a great similarity to the
action of the drug, it is really criminal not to give quite small doses?»
indeed as small as possible. In such cases the size of the doses pre
scribed in the routine Practice ‘become real poison and murderous’

fue brik bas



--- Page 46 ---
ESS SEES CET

Tf yo haveviven/a'dose Gf mcdieinie Wait for tHe symptoms to,
gy ‘come and go in the natural manner. To a great extent: this isthe!
tendency, vith.sy.cosis;' the tendency ds:rather, outward: ..:: 4

Avoid unnecessary aggravation of symptoms by adusting the?
potency: to.the, patients; bap 25 AUG or }
0 Note’ the difference betwek deat on of distase ana
that belonging to the remedy. Large’ dose ‘really! aggravates’ tHe:
-: disease,-high potencies aggravates the: symptoms of the disease.

: Disease is not caused by microbes, we should not be’ catrikd®
away by. these idle allopathi¢: dreams; and. vain. smaginations ‘but .
should correct the vital force. ja. “ hatfhanod sad oe yangt

» Leave.out names. when. prosaribing: They are: only ‘for: the 1 fool-
ish and for the;beards of, healthy ;. Heel: $GVO bud! mag

Mt

-Nosodes act well, when ater is. s great weakness and. fow v-symp-
: toms;. rug os i

adn regard to to nosctte! shot sp cestibieahy ‘upon the: syntiptoms: which i
they produce upon the healthy they will cure-the samé‘as ‘Stier t rem”
~ edy:, But to-use: these things indiscriminately: 1s is.an: noutrage:

oda

_ANTIPSORIC: That do not relate to, the constitutional condi
tions of patient are comforting and palliative, and act, as. short acting. .,
remedies.

“You cannot mitigate paroxysmal disease very, uch during the.
attack, indeed, if the medicine is given. then it, very. often i Increases ;,
the difficulty, but if you wait until the close of the paroxysm you get..,
the full benefit of your medicine and the next paroxysm will not
develop or be lighter or if another attack is brought on immediately, |
you may be rest assured there will be no more e (example, intermit~

tent fever).

~ Partly related remedies will ‘change the charaitér of sickness 'S SO
that no one can cure the case. eeord

age


--- Page 47 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

You need not expect great things when you have only patho-
logical symptoms.

Pathology has no place in an effort to select a medicine for the
sick.

Quinine never cures but suppresses and there is nothing in the
history of patient drugged with quinine and Arsenic but congestion
and violence so long as he lives.

Be sure that the remedy has not only the group of symptoms but
also the nature of the case.

Never leave remedies until you have tested it in a higher po-
tency if it has benefited the patient.

Remedy that is dangerous in any case ought not to be consid-
ered as indicated even though the symptoms are similar.

The flopping about and not waiting for remedy to cure is abomi-
nable. There are periods of improvement and the periods of failure.
Let the life force go on as long as it can and repeat only when the
original symptoms come back to stay.

“tructural changes are not the basis for a prescription, but the
symptoms which existed before the structural changes appeared.

Results of disease never form the image of the nature of dis-
ease, the symptoms alone do it.

Where there are extensive structural changes short acting rem-
edies are needed and such antipsorics as do not relate to the case as
it was in the beginning. The remedy that fits the previous condition
will tear the case down.

When a case comes back in a few days with all the symptoms.
changed unless they are reappearance of old symptoms, the pre-
scription was mnaccurate and unfortunate.

All prescriptions that change the image of the case cause sup-
pression.

42



--- Page 48 ---
HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION

Suppressed conditions that are in the economy will come out
under proper homoeopathic treatment.

It is just as dangerous to suppress symptoms by drugs as it is to
remove them with knife.

Prescriptions that change the image of a case cause symptoms
that have been suppressed to return or a cure is not possible.

If kidneys are not working well, the heart is troublesome.

It is not an easy matter to keep your mouth shut and let the
patient tell his own story, it has to be acquired

Get your patient talking if you can, you can find out how he is
sick. It requires a good deal of experience to keep the patient talking
to the line.

You would not think of curing a tumor, if you would misunder-
stand this grand philosphy. You may administer a medicine that
cures what is wrong with the patient and as a result the tumor disap-
pears.

All the venous remedies are braced up by winter and go down
in spring e.g. lachesis, secale, hamamelis, sarsaparilla. It is better
to wait and watch than to do wrong.

ACONITE : Whenever aconite is chosen homoeopathically you
must above all, observe the moral symptoms and be careful that it
closely resembles them, the anguish of mind and body, the restless-
ness and disquiet not be allayed.

(Hahnemann)

There is a teaching that has long prevailed. Give Aconite for
the first stage of an inflammation. It is not good teaching, although
it is recommended in all our books. It does not say what kind of
constitution or how it comes about. Do not practice that way get all
the elements for an Aconite case, if possible or give a better remedy.

43


--- Page 49 ---
AOBEFORE, PRESCRIBING!

aAmations that come: e-tnewaithiBhick discharges would

never be Aconite. feorisod ouiedovor

o} af ties eguib ve emmotqarye 220%

ft has two very important modalities,’ v
a 80MM ¢ aft it ;

24 18 eo G

“of death or other horrors and anxieties would soon hep them to face
-their: endows, with strength anidcresolution. nant fort Bloc,
tel) oniolsarn 6 Ss Vs sor ; (DR an Grimey ste
~qserb tomul art sluestt 6 28 brie Inousg 3 wh Pteyg GOT EF BL Td) 9 SOUND
ACONITE - AND BELLADONNA : have known tempera
ment so intensely Aconite or. Belladonna, that. they, could, not take

nedies except in the. high, and J ighest potencies and. “phe
“only j in simple doses at long intervals.)

Ob Of ree

* Aconite i is a a great pain 1 remed - tionite pains: are: : intolerable
and generally;xorse in the evening or at night.

(Dr. E. B. Nash.)

end dad? anirlosas ear orunt

Wr Wie ore fog un
fault is suited:to the eomiplaints ‘that oie orf'Suddenly from int
‘tensely hot weather or-siminer! “thas the' lungs: and brain conit
plaints of winter atid bowel inflammation and’ stomach disorder of
summer? 0 5 371910 aldizzoq” ti o@ec Sinook ne vot eines io odd

(Dr ‘UT. Kent)

ay


--- Page 50 ---
Si:
) PRESCRIPT TON,

€

eb RINGS
od a CP ges OLY? Yo toss.
Aconite is a useful medicine i in 1 inflammation of liver when it

gomes suddenly; It is nat very useful. in repeated a attacks, butin the
first. , moh

- gsuoAconite isracquick noting superficial’ remedy for the acute and
imost distressing condition, shen the ne patient getting Aconite lies down
aelaxed:and sleeps...) ..: TS: «Dr: M-k. Tyler)
hth: Anacardium + As: contraindicated were! there! is? ant ‘excessive
scene y — bibod abo
ol?

aneort auf i 7d (Baprington)

: idt do fhert ei st oaer
Aig wit: : ‘Aggravation “when said i amelioration cold,

no thirst in dropsy and fever, albumin, lower lids puffy. Burning
stinging pain} feeling of suffécation!:edema, throat swelling rapid,
difficult breathing, painless throat affection. Body and hair: sensi-
five,and sore to touch, alternately dry and hot or sweating,

blot ARSENIC-AL Bu: liteveryone of these affections; ranging along
athe whole length: of: the<canal ‘and from the. lightest grade of
‘irritation to-the most-intense inflammatory and malignant form of
disease, we will be apt:to findieverywhere present the characteristic
burning of this remedy, in greater‘or lésser: degree and‘hot‘the char-
acteristic‘amelioration’ from heat:and also; though aot quite so:in- .
variably, the. muds mB aggravatlonors eisdits insesalava 2!
Caiehs OF bas (Dr. E. B. Nash) fi

7 gel

atl: it ry sod cae)

bs: 3 Ars: Patients wéakiout’ GEpropoiikonte tie fest Oeisis ‘troubles.

nm OE

is TAILNOD sit as
“Ars. is Suitable in every form, the mildest t to the most s severe.
aw t nolisanlyxe Lsorgolodieg Hot) evan 2D: Botir) |!
TNO 910 060 sv .piltevs Yo evel two me ents dud Jp usm bivo9
ooundbmakes; little differonos: shat the disease 4s; af this ‘persistemsy
restlessness: andiespecially af, great dyeakness is also present donity
forget Arsenic. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

of DHIMAN he?
B.HMS ‘7th Patch}
Govt fomoce Fotnic Medical Lo laser
mirpur-14, Ohaka-1206


--- Page 51 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

BARYTA-MUR : In glandular affections, is the natural.com-
pliment of “Conium” but much deeper in action. —

BELLADONNA : Affects the whole vascular system, the heart,
the lungs, the brain and the nervous system.

If during epidemic, Jahr says, the first premonitory symptoms
attack a person in health such as angina with a peculiar scarlet
redness of the fauces, with vomiting and headache may sometimes
be associated. Belladonna in such circumstances is rather hurtful
than useful in as much as it may impede the breaking out of the
exanthema and by this means exposes the lives of the patient to
great danger. It is full of thirst, we find when we come to study the
stomach symptoms. (Dr. J.T.Kent)

In insanity it is a frequent mistake to give belladonna too low,
the higher potencies act better more frequently. ( Dewey )

Belladonna is one of the leading remedies in all acute, febrile
and inflammatory disorders as well as spasm. The very wide field
of indication is partly attributed to the nerves, action of therapeutic
doses and high dilution. It has often been established that lower
doses paralyse the autonomic nervous system whereas the latter is
excited by minimum doses. If you want to be successful with Bel-
ladonna treatment then great care in regard to the dose is necessary.

The unpleasant effects are much intensified if vinegar is taken
after it. (H. C. Marrow)

That medicine is partially applicable, and in fact takes the lead
over all other in cases in which quickness or suddenness of either
sensation or motion is predominant. (Gurnesy)

All these symptoms have.their pathological explanation if we
could give it, but acting on our laws of similia, we can cure our
patient and one is not left at sea, without chart or compass, because
we cannot explain. We know that symptoms are the natural outcry

46


--- Page 52 ---
HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION

of the pathological state and that the administration of a poison
which is capable of setting up a similar outcry cures the patient.
(E. B. Nash) |

BRYONIA : It is common for Bryonia to be ameliorated from
cold air, cold applications but there are rheumatic complaints;
complaints of Bryonia which are better from heat and under these
circumstances he is better from continued motion.

The urine is scanty and only exceptionally (or as I would ex-
press it reactionally) copious. We must remember that every rem-
edy has a dual action. These two actions are termed as primary and

secondary. I think that the so called secondary action which is only

the reaction of the organism against the first or primary (so called)
action of the drug. For instance the real action of opium is to pro-
duce sleep or stupor, the reaction is wakefulness; of podophyllum,
Aloes, etc. cathatrics; the reaction constipation, and I think that the
truly homocopathic curative must be in accord with the primary (so
called) effects of every drug in order to get the best and most radical

- cure, but if given for the secondary (so called) symptoms, the pri-
mary ones having passed by, we should carefully inquire for all the
symptoms which have preceded those which are present; and taking
both past and present, let them all enter into the picture whose coun-
terpart is to be found in the drug which is to cure. Any other method
is only palliative and not curative.

(Dr. E. B. Nash)

It makes no difference what the name of the disease, if the pa-
tient feels greatly relieved by lying still and suffers greatly on the
slightest motion, and the more and longer he moves the more he
suffers, Bryonia is first remedy to be thought of and there must be
very strong counter indication along other lines that will rule it out.

CALCAREA CARB. : When given in repeated doses of 30th
dilution relieves the pain attending the biliary passage. An opacity

47


--- Page 53 ---
BFR prescRIBING

“itself, when it ig present is not a symptom, but'a'result of dis ase.
Suppose the patient always avoids warm things and:much clothitig
and wanted the’cold air, and still had a dozen Key-notes, you would ©

_find every | time that Calcarea could fail: =. 4. y

i Young children thrive on repeated. dose of Calearea (only when
indicated) but with adults, especially old. people, “must be arts
not to repeat too often as it is likely to.do harm: :

“(Noel Pudde F Phatty

“ERT The calcium metabolism to which this: rarhedyi is a-good corréé-
itive plays its chief rule so long as general ‘growth takes place;'espé-
iially bone growth. After this we havé to-be continuous iIn’'piving
(this: remedy in high’ or repeated dose. In grown ‘up anid old; this
-temedy should be given if compelled by exact similar picture of this

-temedy. Even then it should ‘be given in riost infrequent d doses 8 and
‘in moderate potency. en ok

It is astonishing that one single dose of the potency suitable %b
‘meet the state of disorder will make that infant commence to digest
“tts food, and assimilates from its food the lime substance that it
“heeds in its bones, and wherever else it needs it. All at oncé the teeth
“begin to grow; the bones begin to grow, and the legs get stiff enough
“for him to begin to walk; and they will hold him up. It is astonishing
-Avhat changes will take place under the various “medicines that are
Suitable for the disturbance of the hair, the bones and nails.

The calcarea patient can’t go upstairs, he is so tired in his legs
and so tired in the chest, he pants and suffocates. from going up-
stairs. He. has every evidence of muscular weakness and flabbiness.
‘Nutrition i Is impaired everywhere, This i is a king. of. patient that used
ito be called scrofulous, now calcarea i is one of our deepest acting

-antipsoric. Itisa medicine: that goes. deep, into. the life and takes.a
‘deep hold of every part of the economy.
ci0€ It expels the tapeworms:ig nadW  GAAD oo A.

YB



--- Page 54 ---
HINTS ¥O"ARESCRIPTION

aae\T-only tell you this: to‘give ‘you an idea -how long :it' takes ‘to
gestore order; for nature herself to replace the bad: tissue and pat
healthy tissue in that‘same place to:restore an organ: It takes time
(and: it’is best that we should not be surprised. It may be that the
medicine has done all it can do here.1s another thing I have seen
‘even when there were no symptoms, left and after waiting a consid-
erable time, there were no symptom. have seen another dose of the
$time medicine that was: given’on the last symptoms give the patient
a great lift, and pathological condition commence to ‘go away. “So
Calcarea isa great friend of occulist and every physician ought to
be just.as. good prescriber as the occulist can, be for he prescribes
for. the patient. In_prescribing I am in, doubt whether there can.be
any such thing as a speciality, because the homoeopathic physician
prescribes for the patient, whether he has eye disease, ear disease,

throat disease ¢ or tung disease etc.

foto SOSUPST! oo 76 ‘(Dr LL Kent)
a Ge Qa QOD oar Wi Seo By boot
(dle: ‘CAPSICUM. : - Diseases cured by capsicum are rarely met
(Hahnemann.

“Most of the substances that one, ‘uses on nthe table as. seasoning
in foods will in the cause ofa generation, or, to. be very usefukmed
eottee, ‘pepper and these poison our affects i in the parents. which, can
gause in the children a.predisposition, to, disease, which is similar to
the disease produced, by. these. substances. yao

(das ah) . OF J.T. Kent):

cold on the acute remedy, but thé old soi ‘rheumatic: flabby "il
‘tients needa constitutional remedy; icits ae. Ssauceoroi ov

Dr kT kent)

' CARBO-VEG ‘No, truer remark’ was ever written’ than that
carbo-veg. is especially adapted to cAchetic individuals whdse vital
powéfs‘have become weakened. This remark is made particularly

49


--- Page 55 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

clear when considered in the light of those cases in which diseases
seem to be engrafted upon the system by reason of the depressing
influence of some prior derangement (psorinum).

(Dr. H. N. Guernsey)

In chronic complaints following or dating back for years to some
imperfectly suppressed acute disease

Coldness of the knees, even in bed (Apis); or left arm and left
leg; very cold hands and feet; finger nails blue.
(E. B. Nash)

Carbo-veg. often at the brink of death is a saviour in those
states of collapse, dissolution of blood and paralytic condition which
seems rapidly to involve the whole organism.

(Dr. C.G. Raue)

Acidity and pyrosis is frequent; the plainest food disagrees, fat
foods especially. Here carbo-veg. succeeds when Pulsatilla fails.
(Dr. E. B. Nash)

Vital force nearly exhausted, cold surface, especially from knees
down to feet; lies motionless, as if dead; breath cold; pulse intermit-
tent, thready; cold sweat on limbs. This is truly desperate condition.
Then add to these symptoms, blood stagnated in the capillaries,
causing blueness, coldness and echymoses; the patient is so weak
that he cannot breathe without being constantly fanned. Says, “fan
me, fan me”. Carbo-veg. has saved such cases.

(Dr. E. B. Nash)

CAUSTICUM :: In 6th dilution will give immediate relief to
pains in cases of burns and scalds.

No homoeopath can afford to be without an understanding of
Causticum upon the respiratory organs.

It may be called for the colic after failure of Colocynth. The
pains are gripping cutting relieved by bending double.
(Dr. Hahnemann). .

50


--- Page 56 ---
HINTS:‘TO PRESCRIPTION

CHAMOMILLA : Dr. Tyller said once to me, “when the hus-
band complains of the wife being cross and irritable; and he cannot
get along with her”, give him a dose’ of Chamomilla and it has
worked. I have done it many times.

(Dr. Edwards)

We might draw lines of differentiation between this and other
restless remedies, but it would take too long. Such physicians must
get a habit of doing this for himself. In this ability to do this lies the
superior skillfullness of the homoeopathic practioner.

COLCHICUM : It leaves the uric deposit in blood and tissues.
The outside symptoms are gone but inside disease remains.

COLOCYNTH : In neurotic symptoms it is closely allied to
Dioscorea villosa.
(Farrington)

COLLINSONIA : Colic cured with it over the indications of
obstinate constipation, great flatulence and haemorrhoids.
(Dr. E. B. Nash)

In heart disease complicated with haemorrhoids consult
Collinsonia. When Digitalis and other remedies fail.

DIGITALIS : Farrington points out that as the tendency of the
drug like that of Arsenic and Lachesis is downward (means
deathwards) it must be used only when properly indicated by its
symptoms, otherwise the patient will become worse and may suc-
cumb. (Bhanja)

FERRUM-MET : Iron is no more a panacea for anaemia than
is quinine for malaria or phosphate of lime for deficient bone devel-
opment. My experience has taught me that there are several other
equally efficient remedies for these conditions and that when they
are not indicated they not only cannot cure but do injure everytime
they are prescribed, especially in the material doses in which they
are generally recommended by such teachers. I must here state my


--- Page 57 ---
VBBEORE PRESCRIBING): :

experietice found:on abundant: practi¢e-drid ébserVaticnthdt Such
prescribing is:not only: un+Hahnemannian, but in:every sense ‘un-,
Homoeopathie and [warn alt beginners! not to practice. along) that.:
line or they too will come to top of the few. satisfactory and certain
things in modern medicine.

Osh 2, B. Nash)

“Itis is evident, therefore, that i iron does not acta asa curative agent
by virtue of its absorption as a constituent of the blood, but rathe
as we are led to conclude, from its physiological effects upon the
organs and tissues of the body, that it owes its therapeutic virtues to
the same essential dynamic agency possessed by.other. drugs, and?
its application i Is Subject to the s same therapeutic, BA y

eer OL BER,

HELLEBORUS : When it was given, repair set in, not in-
stantly, but gradually. The remedy acts slow in slow, stubborn,
stupid cases ofa brain and spinal trouble. Sometimes there ‘is no
apparent change until the day after the remedy is administeréd or’
even the next night, when there comes a sweat, a diarrhoea, a vom-
iting: a.reaction:-They must -not be interfered with, no remedy must
be given. They are signs of reaction. If the child has vitality. enough \
to recover, he will now recover. If the vomiting is stopped by any
remedy that will stop it, then Helleborus will be antidoted**’

. (Dr. J. T. Kent)

IGNATIA : We do not. know half as much about the. human.
mind as we think we do. We only know its manifestation, these little.,
things belong to this sphere of action of this medicine. The one who
knows the materia medica applies it in its breadth and | its length and
sees mit: that which is similar. fae

In acute cases, one must have a remedy o of the highest ating in”
the © outstanding symptoms. ee mie
cod dauen | at a “Or Stephenson)

52e


--- Page 58 ---
BST RS FRE BERIOH EN NN

5 -Agnatia bears the; Sens ratonsiie teeaess 9 ot women Ast
Nux, does to bilious MEeribri mafto ems oe saigibermt eporgdost
HO? OOP ho Fata, Hol 6 H nIBgs get.

BB Nash)!
» The throat takes an extreme ii LachesixThis' dryness igwith-
- out ‘thirst; dryness with aversion'to’ ‘water®'wbrs BY ud

- If pus has already formed in ovaritis, Lathésis may be the most *

ce appropriate remedy to promote its escape externally or through the.

intestine. oe ' (Guernseyy
x Le

LYCOPODIUM : If you find corresponding failure in the sen-
soriuim ‘of old” mei, the’ methory fails, they use wrong words to
express themselvés‘ mix things, of generally in writing, spelling and“
are in short, unable to do ordinat'y merital work‘on account of fail-’
ing | ‘brain n power remember riyeopodium- vosluaey ei iio oP

io se Dr? B Nash)

A feeling of satiety iS found under. his, ot amas.
with a feeling of RHE 2 of.a a: pecahat kind. cole) de auc
gages ito ofDr. E, B “Nash z

ans

The liver troubles of Lyco. are. more to be, of the atrophic v; vari- :
ety, while those of China are hyperrophi, both being caval. use-_

cthosis of liver, . yen

-  biget s bas grillova ailt 10 gonsbac ;
“LILIUM-TIG, Lilium patient is best described as a Sepia.s
patient Presenting Cactus ails sole
4

UE Fiedric Haman) ;
oye dau nr yédl eo) Soc cirrad T esr

She



--- Page 59 ---
His aw Ror

BEFORE PRESCRIBING |

MERCURIUS : Be careful how you give mercury. It is a
trecherous medicine. It seems often indicated. You give it and it
relieves but your patient is worse again in a few weeks and then you.

give it again with relief. By and by, it fails you. Now if I want to

make a permanent cure, for instance, in a scrofulous child, I will ©
seldom give him mercury, should I do so, it will be atleast as an
intercurrent remedy. (Farrington) _

The glands and bones also come strongly under the influence of
this remedy. The glandular swellings are cold, inclined to suppu-
rate, having these chilly creepings fore mentioned. These with the
bone pains in the exostoses and caries are all aggravated at night in
the warmth of the bed.

(Dr. E. B. Nash)

It must be remembered that mercury is no more a panacea for _
syphilis than is sulphur for psora or thuja for sycosis, also there
would be no truth in similia similibus.

The chill is peculiar as I have observed it. It is not a shaking
chill but is simply creeping chilliness. Often when this creeping chilli-
ness is felt it is the first symptom of a cold that has been taken and
if left alone, the coryza, sore throat, bronchitis or even pneumonia
may follow, but if taken early a dose of mercurius may prevent all
such troubles. The chilliness is felt most generally in the evening
and increases into the night ifnot removed by mercury. It also alter-
nates with flushes of heat, first chilly, then hot, then chilly etc. like
Arsenicum. It is often felt in single parts. If pus has already formed _
especially much of it the only thing mercury can do Is to hasten its
discharge, but if little or none is actually formed a dose of mercury
high will often check the formation and a profuse sweat often fol- |
lows with a subsidence of the swelling and a rapid cure of the dis-
case.

If anyone is skeptical as to the efficiency of the very high poten-
cies I invite him to a test in just such a case. Give a single dose, dry

54


--- Page 60 ---
HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION

upon the tongue or if you must seem to do more, dissolve a powder
in four table spoon full of water and give him in half hourly doses.
Then wait. I have done it many times and I am convinced.

(Dr. E-B.Nash)

NAT-MUR. : In high dilution it is a marvellous remedy for
oxygenoid types, children, adolescents, weak and worn out patients.
On the contrary it should not be applied in hydrogenoid patients
having nephritis. We may use it in this case in dilution not higher
than 6x.

(F. Bernoville:

I have seen a patient who had lost forty pounds of flesh (weight,
160ib), though eating well all the time, under one dose of Nat-m.;
tip the scales at 2001b, with in three months from the time of taking.
He was very hypochondriac at the time of the beginning of the treat-
ment. (Dr. E. B. Nash)

NAT-SULPH. : A Nat-sulph patient will say, “Doctor, you do
not know how I have to resist killing myself. An impulse to do it
comes into my mind”. ,

NUX-VOM.: Should be given in higher potency, the more.ex-
act the similimum, must be given in the evening, one may and that if
one is not sure, one will achieve more of an organic action with
lower potencies. More of a psychic one with higher one.

(DR. M. H. Deichmann)

It is closely related to su/ph often antidotes the action of sul-
phur: It seldom goes. to the bottom and antidotes the constitutional
action of sulphur; but it will remove its exaggerated action, its su-
perficial action.

(Dr. J.T.Kent)

As regards literality in. Nux-v., abdominal symptoms tend to be
right sided and chest symptoms left sided.
(Dr. Gibson)

55


--- Page 61 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

OPIUM : There is no response to light, touch, noise or any-
thing else, in the indicated remedy which is Opium. So in pneumo-
nia, where Opium has made remarkable cures in homocopathic hand,
while in massive or what they like to call heroic, doses of the old
school (given to stop pain and procure sleep), it has sent many @ a
poor victim to his long resting place.

(Dr. E E. B. Nash)

Every where Opium is a producer of insensibility and partial or
complete paralysis and other things being equal, is homocopathically
indicated there. (Dr. E. B. Nash)

I will say just here that any homoeopathic physician that feels
i obliged to use Opium or its alkaloid in this way and for this purpose
“* does not understand his business and had better study his “Materia-

Medica” and the principles of applying it according to Hahnemann,
or else go over to the old school where they make no pretentions to
have any law of cure. In the first place Opium in narcotic doses
does not produce sleep, but stupor, and it only relieves pain by ren-
dering the patient unconscious to it. How many cases have been so
marked by such treatment, that the disease progressed until there
was no chance to cure? Pain, fever and all other symptoms are the
voice of this disease, telling where the trouble is and guiding us to
the remedy. (Dr. E. B.Nash)

PASSIFLORA INCARNATE: it does not usually act well in
full blooded or plethoric, but rather in those who are weak and en-
feebled. (Cowperthwaite)

PHOSPHOROUS : Although it has the marked symptoms of
unquenchable thirst for cold drinks also is a thirstless remedy, a fact,
which is very easily overlooked.

(Dr. Rudolph F. Rabs)

PHOSPHORIC-ACID : It is never to be used where general
irritability is present, and probably many failures are owing to its
misuse in this particular. (Dewey)

56


--- Page 62 ---
HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION

It seems very similar that, after so much talk about the general
depression or weakness of this remedy, we should be obliged to.,
record that the profuse and sometimes long continued diarrhoea
should not debilitate, as a characteristic symptom.

“ . mee (Dr. E. B: Nash)

~ Let'us yemember that the profound weakness and depression of
Phosphoric-acid i is upon the sensorium and nervous system, and
will be there whether diarrhoea is present or not. It is markedly so in

typhoids, so I can. fully attest from abundant observation.
(Dr. E. B. Nash)

~ PULSATILLA : The hemorrhages flow and stop and flow
again, continually changing, the stoolsin diarrhoea constantly change
in colour; they are green, yellow, white, watery or slimy, as Guern-
sey expresses it; no two stools alike. © (Dr. E.B. Nash)

RHUS-TOX : back pain between the shoulders on swallow-
ing. Cough during chill, dry teasing, fatiguing, but urticaria over |
body during heat. (Dr. E.B. Nash) ©

I Have used it both high and low, and find it useful all along the
scale, but | have an M. M potency made upon my own potentizer
which has served me so well, and so many times, that I cannot re-
frain from speaking of it. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

SEPIA : After a prescription giving relief, do not give a remedy
for any new symptoms appearing in a less vital part.
(Dr. Adolph Lippe)

It is prime rule not to keep repeating your remedy when the
intervals between aggravation of the disease are lengthening. This
is an indication that the patient is improving.

(Homoeo Recorder Aug. 31)

The hands are hot and the feet are cold; or as soon as the feet
become hot, the hands become cold. This is an excellent indicating
symptom for Sepia.

57.


--- Page 63 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

SILICEA : As for Silicea, this is cold blooded in the chronic
cases, but if a dose of Silicea is acute or subacute, then it is usually
hot blooded, warm blooded.

(Dr. Bellokossy)

It does not-increase in size or strength, learns to walk late, in
short, if not actually sick in bed, everything seems to have come to
a stand still so far as growth or development is concerned. _

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

The child takes nourishment enough but, whether vomited or
retained, goes on emaciating and growing weaker and weaker until
it dies of inanition, unless Silicea checks this process. Many such
cases have I saved with this remedy and made them healthy chil-
- dren.

It builds them up, and so it seems, for under its action the patient’s
spirits rise, hope revives, the weakness and depression give way to
a feeling of returning strength and health. It makes no difference
whether the ulcerations are in the tissues already named, in the lungs,
intestinal track, or mammae, or elsewhere, the effect is the same,
and the improvement in the local affection generally follows the
general constitutional improvements.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

SULPHUR : Sulphur may be applied to oxygenoids, to
hydrogenoids and to: carbonitrogenoids. In oxygenoids patients we
must not prescribe it in very high dilutions because they may cause
rapid emaciation. Let us not forget that asthmatic patient 1s to us
always a tubercular patient but if this tubercular patient 1s emaci-
ated, if his power of defence is bad, if he has easy and frequent .
febrile attacks, Sulphur may augment that tendency because the
centrifugal action of this remedy is always extremely violent. There-
fore, in oxygenoid patient it is necessary to prescribe a dilution not
beyond 30. In these cases it is preferable to check the centrifugal
action of Sulphur by giving its compound Sulphur-Iodatum.

58


--- Page 64 ---
HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION

It seems to have the power of equalizing the circulation in
persons subject to local congestion-inflammation.

It is the only warm drug that craves fat.
(Dr. Nash)

- When a patient is aggravated by Sulphur, we must always think
of the latent state of syphilis, if Puls. another antidote of Sulphur
does not produce any result, syphilinum is an antidote to Sulphur.
) (Dr. Leon Renard)

I think Arsenicum leads in all acute diseases, while Sulphur
leads in chronic affections.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

~ In tuberculosis affecting the lungs Su/phur is indicated only in
the beginning. I would here caution you as to how you use the drug.
If carelessly or wrongly given, it may precipitate the disease which
you desire to cure. You must not repeat your doses too frequently
and you must never give it unless you are certain that it is the rem-
edy, for the tendency of Sulphur is to arouse whatever is dormant in
the system. The particular indications for Sulphur are (1) The body
feels too hot (2) the patient wants the doors and windows open, no
matter how cold the weather may be (3) there are frequent flushes
of heat (4) empty, all gone feeling in the stomach (5) heat on the top
of head (6) cold feet (7) palpitation of heart on ascending and (8)
pain through the left chest from the nipple to the back. Now in this
condition you may give Sulphur as high as you may choose. One,
two, or three doses and wait for results. Watch your patient care-
fully and in many instances a cure will result, but not in all.

(Farrington)

I now come to an attempt to give some idea of curative sphere
of Hahnemann’s king of antipsorics. I do not in this place feel it
incumbent upon me to enter into a defence of Hahnemann’s psora
theory against those who discard it because they do not understand

59


--- Page 65 ---
wR OL

oad

_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING

it. With those who do understand and profit by it there is no need of
such defence. The truth stands confirmed (with those who have put
to the test Hahnemann’s rules for the use of Sulphur) that it has
power to meet and overcome certain obstacles to the usual action of
drugs when indicated by the symptoms or least seemingly so. That
is the reason why the indication as laid down in the books reads,
“When seemingly indicated drugs do not cure, use Sulphur”, be-
cause psora is the obstacle to be overcome.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Let no one understand that 'Su/phur is the only remedy capable
of removing psoric complications, but simply that Su/phur will be
likely to be oftener indicated here, because it oftener covers the usual
manisfestations of psora in its pathogenesis than any other remedy.
There are antipsorics like Psorinum, Causticum, Graphites etc.
which may have to be used instead of Su/phur. And we know which
one by the same law guides us in the selection of the right remedy
anytime. (DR. E.B.Nash)

There is one thing about Su/phur that is often unclear estimated
by the profession in general, vix, its power of absorption. It is after
the state of effusion has set in or even later when this stage is passed
and the results of the inflammatory process are to be gotten rid of,
like the enlargement of joints in rheumatism, exudations into serous
sacs, hernia, meningeal membranes, peritoneum etc. Bryonia is one
of the remedies first thought of in these cases, and we have another
remedy that is making a record for itself here viz, kali-mur. but
when the case is complicated by psora especially when the charac-
teristic burning stand out prominently. Su/phur is almost sure to be

needed before the case is finished. (Dr. E.B. Nash). .

SYPHILIS : One may prescribe on a pathological basis where
a remedy is known to have a relationship with certain tissues ¢.g.
Hepar-sulph for suppuration, Silicea for inflammation near bone,
Bryonia for serous tissues.

60



--- Page 66 ---
SN

HINTS TO PRESCRIPTION

TUBERCULINUM : In view of what Dr. Bumet has written
and my own limited experience lately, I am confident that
Tuberculinum is destined to rank with Psorinum in the treatment of
chronic diseases. (DR. E.B.Nash)

The similarity of Tuberculinum to Sulphur is so great that any
Sulphur case which fails to respond to Sulphur, may be tentatively
considered a Tuberculinum case on the strength of its Su/phur symp-
toms.

(Dr. Edward Whitemont)

I have wasted much time trying to find a remedy in cases with
tuberculosis in the family. Now I like very much to augment
Tuberculinum with Syphlinum.

(DR. Wilburk Bond)

VERAT-ALB. : It is said to be a good remedy for rheumatism,
which is worse in wet whether and which drives the patient out of
bed.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

61


--- Page 67 ---
DIET

CONDITION OF CURE IS:

Put the patient on light diet.

Diminish his smoking, get rid entirely of the drinking and put
» him on a perfectly bland living. This is the first thing.

You must not be so violently temperate and in favour of prohi-
bition that if a patient longs for beer in acute suffering you will not
give it.

It is always a peculiar thing when one of the articles of diet
such as milk, sugar, salt, starch etc. and the things of the table make
sick.

Asparagus is an excellent article of diet in rheumatism and in
renal dropsy.

In all brain troubles we must be careful about feeding much or
overloading the stomach, because the stomach is very feeble, and
will not digest much. But the food should be well selected and light.

Tomatoes, strawberries and oysters are digested in a few min-
utes by eating cheese.

In acute diseases when they crave for lemon, it is good for them.

Abuse of salt as a condiment may be successfully antidoted by
“Sweet Spirit of Nitre”.

Tobacco is one of the most troublesome things you will run
across. Many cases will not recover promptly if they are tobacco
_. users and great smokers, wine drinkers, convivial men, they run
‘around a good deal and are high liners, you have a slow case on

hand. With the system so broken down from high living you may

63



--- Page 68 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

not get a decided curative action until you have forced him to
abandon his way of living.

A. strict milk and fruit’ diet dught to be advised in treating
ovarian tumors.

Ledum counteracts the effect of whisky and takes away the ap-
petite for it. ay
With Nat-mur. not to take menthol or ‘peppermint in general.
With Sulphur we suggest not to take chamomile tea.
- When we give Sepia to a patient we tell them to stop vinegar
and lemon, or anything which is sour.

64


--- Page 69 ---
DISEASES

ABSCESS
(See Boils and Carbuncles)

MERCURIUS : As a rule, Mercurius does not prevent forma-
tion of pus, but rather favours it. If you give it too soon, you will
spoil the case. In felons, however, if it is given low and carly, it will
generally favour the rapid formation of pus.

(Farrington)

ALLERGIES

PSORINUM : I have found atleast several times that a remedy
like Psorinum which is so terribly chilly, is necessary in the course
of treatment of deep allergies inspite of the fact that the patient is
very warm blooded. (Dr. Pierre Schimidth)

ANAEMIA

ARSENIC ALB : The general practitioner conformed with a
case exhibiting anaemia, must avoid the temptation to commence
treatment before making a diagnosis, for even single dose of
haematinic may entirely alter the marrow picture within 24hours.

(Dr. Charles Stward) ©

FERR-MET : Iron is no more a panacea for anaemia than is
quinine for malaria or phosphate of lime for deficient bone develop-
ment.

65



--- Page 70 ---
=e Ht)

+s es =

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

My experience has taught me that there are several other equally
efficient remedies for the condition and that when they are not indi-
cated, they not only cannot cure but do injure every time they are
prescribed especially in the material doses in which they are gener-
ally recommended by some teachers. I must here state my experi-
ence founded in abundant practice and observation that such pre-
scribing is not only un-Hahnemannian but in every sense un-
Homoeopathic and I warn all beginners not to practice along that
line or they too will come to talk of the few satisfactory and certain
things in modern medicine.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

GREEN SICKNESS : “Ferrum’” will be found of great value
when the symptoms agree in that wonderful anaemic state called
“green sickness” that comes on with girls at the times of puberty in
the years that follow it. There will be almost no menstrual flow but
cough will develop, with great pallor. So common is this sickness
among girls that all mothers are acquainted with it and dread it.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

It is true when Iron is introduced into the system in large quan-

- tities with the view of supplying a deficiency of Iron in the blood,

that it is not assimilated, but may be almost entirely obtained from
the faeces having been eliminated by intestines.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)
NATRUM-MUR. : It is one of our best remedies for
anaemia. It does not seem to make much difference whether the
anaemia is caused by loss of fluids (China, Kali-c.), menstrual ir-
regularities (Puls.), loss of semen (Phos-ac., China), grief or other
mental diseases.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

I have seen better cures of bad cases of anaemia by Nat.-
mur. in potentized form than I ever did from Iron in any from al-
though iron has its cases, as also Puls., Cyclamen, Calc-Phos.,
Carb-veg., China and many other remedies.

66


--- Page 71 ---
DISEASES ~

CCHLOROSIS : It takes years to establish health in a typi-
cal chlorosis, the cut finger bleeds only water, the mentrual flow is
only a leucorrhoea, their is pernicious anaemia.

(Alphabetical Repertory by Dr. G.D. Shirivastava &
Dr. J. Chandra)

ASTHMA

ACONITE : It is indicated in that dyspnoea that belongs
to capillary bronchitis. It is an asthmatic dyspnoea and there is
usually dryness of mucous membranes of the small bronchia
tubes.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

ADRENALIN CHLORIDE : It gave dramatic relief in acute
bronchial asthma but Arsenic is to be followed for weakness.
(Homoeo Record Feb. 1996)

AMYL NITRATE : Asthma of adults. It should not be given
» to children.
(Black-Wood)

ARSENIC ALBUM : I remember a case of asthma of years
standing to which I was called at midnight, because they were afraid
the patient would die before morming. Found that her attacks al-
ways come at | a.m. Gave Arsenicum Alb. and she was completely
cured by it

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Asthma of children if Ars. palliates, try Nat.-Sulph.

In a case of asthma, when Ipecac., Ars., Lob. are powerless,
Senega will relieve several cases of worst asthma. It is a great rem-
edy for cough, not generally appreciated by the profession.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)



--- Page 72 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

HEPAR-SULPH. : The Hepar asthma is worse in dry cold air
and better in damp, while Nat-sulph is exactly the opposite like
Dulcamara. There is no other remedy that I know that has amclio-
ration so strongly in damp weather as Hepar-sulph.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

PSORINUM : In deep psoric cases of asthma, it may induce _
terrific aggravation. Psorinum should not be used in higher potency -
than the 30th in cases of asthma even by those. who give almost
entirely the higher degrees.

“(E.Wright)

SULPHUR : Sulphur is almost universal remedy for asthma.

APPENDICITIS

Much pain due to appendicitis contraindicates Aconite.
(Dewey)

BELLADONNA : One has to be careful that if a case is to be
handed to a doctor unfamiliar to homoeopathy, one should not give
a remedy which might mark the symptoms i.e. Be//. in a case of
-~te appendicitis.

(Grace Newall)’

ECHINACEA : Boericke says, :It acts on appendix and has
been used for appendicities. But remember, it promotes suppura-
tion and a neglected appendix with pus formation would probably

rupture sooner under its use. _
f

RHUS-TOX : Rhus-tox is the homoeopathic knife in appendi-
citis.
(Dr. Birgler) '

68


--- Page 73 ---
DISEASES

BLOOD

-ANACARDIUM : It is contraindicated where there is an ex-
cessive coagulability of blood.
(Farrington)

FERRUM-MET-.: Avoid Ferrum in phthisis, in tuberculosis,
syphilis and in persons predisposed to haemorrhages and ‘especially
never repeat it.

(Dr. J.T. kent)~

IPECACUANHA : It is true that when patients have bled, (loss
of blood) until they have become anaemic, are subject to dropsy,
Ipecac. to be the remedy. Its natural follower, then is China which
will bring the patient in position to need an antipsoric remedy.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

PULSATILLA : The blood flows and stops and flows again.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

BOILS

BELLADONNA : it is astonishing how many local inflamma-
tions even a carbuncle or boil will so disturb the general system and
circulation, as to produce the general inflammatory fever, with the
characteristic head symptoms calling for Bell., and no less aston-
ishing how this remedy controls the whole condition, both local and

general, when indicated. What exclaims the believer in local appli-
cations, give Bell. Internally for a boil on the hand or foot? yes,
‘indeed, not only Bell. but Mercurius, Hepar-sulph., Tarent. cubensis |
and many others and you will not have any need for local medica-’
tion at all.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

69


--- Page 74 ---
th ESI

" pe Et

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

ARNICA : it acts as a preventive and curative of boil.

ECHINACEA : It is excellent to break up “BOIL HABIT”.
(Dr. H.D. Roberts)

BRAIN

HELLEBOROUS-NIGER : These symptoms (head rolling
from side to side on the pillow, with screams; great stupidity or
soporiferous sleep, greedy drinking of water; wrinkled forehead with
cold sweat; motion of sw as chewing something) continual motion
of one arm and one lee, while the other lies as if paralysed, urine
scanty or entirely suppressed, (sometimes sediment like coffee
grounds indicate desperate condition, and the patient will soon die
comatose or in convulsions unless the proper remedy can be found.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

CANCER

APIS-MEL. : It has proved very valuable remedy in cancer
even open ones when this stinging, burning pain was present, also
in panaritium.

(Dr. E.B. Nash). .. .

ARSENIC : It is.of great service in epithelioma (cancer) of the
nose or lips. (Dr. J.T. Kent)

In cancrum oris and severe forms of aphthae and generally i in
malignant inflammation and phagedenic conditions of the parts,
Arsenicum.

(Dr. Herring)

Arsenic is a classical remedy for bleeding cancer and many
cases cured or ameliorated by it have been published. It has an equally
great reputation for the cure of lupus.

ds 70


--- Page 75 ---
‘DISEASES —

Arsenic does not work to our satisfaction in c
ment unless a dose of carcinosin is first administered. Arsenic i is .
nae ee ee nr ee end
always useful and necessary in cancer. Although I hav ly fo

CO at ee a ene ad

a malignant tumor dissipat ic I hay rely known,
€ mineral to checks its onward course. It most assuredly exerts,
when discretely administered _a certain of specific influence

over the disease.

In epithelial cancer as of lips, face, and tongue Ars—has_un-_

(Dr. R. Thughes)

Judging from our own experience, in the debility of cancer
Hydrastis must yield place to Arsenic, for we have repeatedly wit-
nessed the most decided improvement from a course of Arsenic.

(Dr. Ruddock)

Arsenic Alb in cancer of breast with great burning distress par-
tially relieved by external warmth. (Dr. Burt)

BELLADONNA : The elder Lippe once told me of a case of
suspicious enlargement with swelling and pain of the breast of long
standing, which he expressed, it seemed likely to prove a case for
surgeon (cancer), which was entirely cured by a few doses of Bell.,
to which he was guided by this symptom ‘pain being so much worse
lying down.’ Since then I have observed and verified this symptom
in many cases of different kinds. I will not stop to give all the symp-
toms that might be present in Bell., headache.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

CALC. CARB : In cancerous affections that would kill in six-

teen months, the patient will live for five years with Calc., if Calc.
is indicated.

CARCINOSIN : Its use in case of active cancer brings un-
pleasant aggravation. It should never be used in such a condition.
Instead treatment should be commenced with low and medium po-
tencies of either medicines.t.e. Thuj., Kreost., Ars., Hydr. etc.

71.

+s


--- Page 76 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

EUPHORBIA HETERODOXA : In an inoperable cancer, it
may at times be possible to mitigate the burning pains with the rem-
edy Euphorbia Heterodoxa in potency.
(Dr. Rudolph.F. Rabe)

HYDRASTIS : I should content, led by my own experience,
that the Hydrastis treatment is the very best known for this dire
- disease. It improves the appetite and condition of the patient gener-
ally. Under its use, the complexion alters, the state of blood im-
proves. It marvelously allays the pain of cancer, in this respect alto-
gether surpassing Opium, morphia or any so called anodyne. It re-
tards the growth of cancer.

(Dr. Gutteridge)

KALI-CARB: It has cured a number of cases of fibroid tumor _
long before it was time for the critical period to.cure..

You must remember that there is natural tendency of fibroid:to
cease to grow at the climacteric period and afterwards to shrivel
and this takes place without any treatment, but the appropriate rem-
edy will cause that hemorrhage to cease, will cause that tumor to
cease to grow and after a few days there will be ground shrinkage i in
its Size.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

. SECALE-COR : It arrests hemorrhages and relieves the ter-
rible burning pains (Ca-uterus) at night, which torments the patient.

SULPHUR : Do not give Sulphur in cancerous casés as it
aggravates.
(Laurahura)

In cancer mammae follow psorinum with sulphur.

(Alphabetical repertory of Dr. G.D.
Srivastava & Dr. J. Chandra)

72


--- Page 77 ---
—

DISEASES

THUJA : In some precancerous or cancer cases, repeated high
dilutions of Thuja may be dangerous.
(F. Bernoville}

CARBUNCLES

ARSENIC ALBUM : We know that it should be given in des-
‘perate carbuncle or pregangrenous infection, ptomaine etc. Do not
be afraid to give it but in ptomaine, it is even more of a two edged
sword than most of our remedies.

(E. Wright)

To call a carbuncle a surgical disease is the greatest absurdity.

An incision is always injurious and often fatal. A case has never
been lost under the right kind of treatment and it should be treated
by internal medicine only.
(Dr. Hering)

MYRISTICA 3X : Called the homoeopathic knife is almost
specific drug to break open carbuncle.

(W. karo)

CHOLERA

BRYONIA 30 : A few globules each time after vomiting alone
or after vomiting or purging it cured even the worst cases of cholera
with loss of consciousness, inability to speak, icy coldness of skin,
wrinkled skin, pulselessness.

(Dr. Haynel)

CARBO-VEG : Except in cholera carbo-veg is rarely indi-
cated in the beginning of any acute disease of the bowels, but in the
later stage 1t may become the only remedy capable of producing
favourable changes. It will not often be required in cases that have

73


--- Page 78 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

had good homoeopathic treatment, but much more frequently in those
coming form allopathic hands. After it are frequently suitable; Ar-
senic, China, merc-sol., Psorinum. It is also useful for the debility
following lasting attack of diarrhoea.

(Dr. J.B. Bell)

VERATRUM-ALBUM.: Veratrum is a remedy of great value
and one very often required but like all others it demands careful
selection and is not to be given in every case of cholera morbus or of
cholera.

The most characteristic symptoms are the same in both
cases, only more violent in the later. The immediate accompani-
ments of the stool with thirst and cravings, distinguishes this rem-
edy. Veratrum is seldom indicated in painless cases.

(Dr. J.B. Bell)

COLIC AND PAIN

ACONITE : It must be given in all those cases where the pa-
tients are almost frantic with pain, which is indescribable and which
coffea has failed to relieve.

, (Dr. C.G. Rane)

CAUSTICUM : It may be called for in colic after failure of

colocynth. The pains are gripping, cutting relived by bending double.
(Dr. Hahnemann)

CHAMOMILLA - In the case of Chamomilla the patient is
exceedingly sensitive to the pain and exclaims continously, “ oh! I
can not bear the pain. “ Many times I have met this condition in
labor cases and in the majority of them the cross, peevish, snappish
condition of the mind accompanying and seeing it changing in a
short time to a mild, uncomplaining patient state, by single dose of
chamomilla 200th.

74


--- Page 79 ---
NN

DISEASES:

COFFA | Coffea will remove the severest pain which drives the
patient almost frantic, they cry, tremble, do not know what to do,
the pain is indescribable, it is, momentarily relieved by holding cold
water in the mouth.

COLLINSONIA: With Collinsonia I cured a very severe colic

_ which has been of frequent occurence in a lady for several years

and had completely baffled the old school efforts to cure. I was led

to choose the remedy on account of the obstinate constipation, the
great flatulence and the haemorrhoidal condition present.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

KALII-CARB. : It would sometimes be cruel to give a dose of
Kali-carb when the colic is on, because if the remedy agrees consti-
tutionally, if all the symptoms of case are those of Kali-carb, the
patient is likely to get an aggravation which would be unnecessary.
One can try short acting remedies that would relieve the pains speed-
ily and at the close of the attack the constitutional remedy can be
given if the patient can bear the pain to the end, it is better to wait
until it passes off without any medicine.

(Dr. J.T.Kent)

LACHESIS : I once had a case of very obstinate constipation
_in an old syphilitic case. He was at last taken with very severe at-
~ tacks of colic. The pains seemed to extend all through the abdomen
and always came on at night. After trying various remedies until I
was discouraged for he got no better fast, he let drop this
expression, “Doctor, if I could keep awake all the time I would
never have another attack”. I looked a glance at him. “I mean, said
he, that I sleep into the attack and waken in it”. I left a dose of lach.
200. He never had an attack of pain and his bowels became per-
fectly regular from the day and remained so.
(Dr. E.B. nash)

75


--- Page 80 ---
BEFORE.PRESCRIBING,

SULPHUR : Never use Sulphur in acute abdomen. Its propen-
sity to create pus and increase its development is well known.
(Dr. H.A. Robert)

ARSENIC-ALBUM : In prescribing Arsenic in neuralgia one
must be careful not to give too low a potency, even 6 will aggravate
as the nerves are apt to be specially irritable. =~

One of the worst cases of sciatica I ever saw was cured
with Arsenic alb. On the indication, worse at midnight, especially
from }:30 a.m. burning pain, and the only temporary relief during
the paroxysms was from bags of hot dry salt applied to the painful
part. The lady was a sister of Charles Saunders of New York, of
school reader fame, who himself was a cripple from allopathically
treated sciatica. She, after suffering indescribable agony for 6 weeks
was cured rapidly and permanently with a dose of Arsenic alb. So
we see again that no remedy and no particular set of remedies can
be entirely relied upon, but the indicated remedy.

' (Dr. E.B. Nash)

COLLAPSE

VERATRUM-ALBUM : If we were to describe in one word
the general condition, as possible, for which this remedy was best,
it would be collapse. Let me quote; “Rapid sinking of forces, com-
plete prostration; cold sweat and cold breath.” “Skin blue, purple,
cold, wrinkled, remaining in folds when pinched.” “Face hippocratic;
nose pointed.” “Whole body icy cold.” “Feet and legs icy cold.”
(Icy coldness of surface, covered with cold sweat-Tabacum).
“Cramps in calves.” All these are verified symptoms, and show to
what an extreme degree of collapse a case may come and yet be
cured. This condition may be found in rapidly progressing acute
cases like cholera, or it may be found in suppressed exanthemata,
or, again, in the course of bronchitis, pneumonia, typhoid or

76


--- Page 81 ---
DISEASES

intermittent fever..No matter where found, or in connection with
whatever disease, if this collapse is present, and especially if the
grand keynote, “Cold sweat on face and forehead, “is present, we
may give this remedy with full confidence that it will do all that can
be done and much more than the old school system of stimulation
with alcoholics.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

CONSTITUTION

ACONITE : CONSTITUTION AND NATURE OF SICK-
NESS : The patient most in need of Aconite are the strong, robust
people, sensitive to dry cold air, We get illustration of its sudden-
- ness and violence in any part of the body, the brain, the lungs, the
liver, the blood, the kidneys.

CALCAREA-CARB : The Calcarea-carb. patient cannot go
upstairs; he is so tired in his legs and so tired in the chest; he pants
and suffocates from going upstairs. He has every evidence of mus-
cular weakness and flabbiness. Nutrition is impaired everywhere.
This is a kind of patient that used to be called scrofulous, now we
call the condition psora and Calcarea is one of our deepest
antipsorics. It is a medicine that goes deep into the life and takes a
deep hold of every part of the economy.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

CALCAREA-PHOS. : The Calcarea phos. child is thin and
emaciated with sunken rather flabby abdomen and predisposed to
glandular and osseous disease. The head is - large and both
fontanelles are open. The cranial bones are unnaturally thin and
brittle. He is slow in learning to walk and its spine is so weak that it
cannot support the body.

Mentally these patients aré very much depressed so that they
are slow of comprehension. As the child grows in years, if not in

11


--- Page 82 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Stature,.any exposure to wet or dampness causes a feeling of gen-
eral aching or soreness particularly when he is moved. The least
motion is unbearable. Do not give Bryonia in such a case because
the patient is worse by motion as it is not the symptom for Bryonia
for it indicates the incipient symptoms of rachitis.

(Farrington)

CARBO-VEG. : No truer remarks was ever written than that
Carbo-veg. is especially adapted to cachectic individuals whose vital
powers have become weakened. The remark is made particularly
clear when considered in the light of those cases in which diseases
seems to be engrafted upon the patient by reason of the depressing
influence of some prior derangement. (Psorinum)

NATRUM-MUR. : In high dilution it is a marvellous remedy
for oxygenoid typed, children, adolescents, weak and worn out pa-
tients on the contrary it should not be applied in hydrogenoid pa-
tients having nephritis. We may use it in this case in a dilution not
higher than 6x.

(F. Bernocille)

I have seen a patient who had lost 40 pounds of flesh (weight,
160ibs), though eating well all time, under one dose of Nat-mur., tip
of scales at 200ibs, within three months from the time of taking. He
was very hypochondniac at the time of beginning of treatment.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

PASSIFLORA INCARNATA : It does not usually act well in
full blooded or plethoric, but rather in those who are weak and en-
feebled. (Cowperthwait)

SULPHUR : It may be applied to oxygenoid, to hydrogenoids
and carbo-nitrogenoids. In oxygenoid patients we must not prescribe
it in very high dilutions because they may cause rapid emaciation.
Let us not forget that the asthmatic patient 1s to us, always a tuber-
cular patient but if this tubercular patient is emaciated, if his power
of defence is bad if he has easy and frequent febrile attacks,

78


--- Page 83 ---
DISEASES

Sulphur may augment that tendency because the centrifugal action

of this remedy is always extremely violent. Therefore, in oxygenoid
_ patents it is necessary to prescribe a dilution not beyond 30. In these
, cases it is preferable to check the centrifugal action of Sulphur by
‘giving its compound Su/phur-lodatum.

CORYZA, CATARRH, INFLUENZA

_ ALLIUM-CEPA : Although it quickly stops the nasal
_catarrh, it frequently seems to drive the trouble to the chest.
Phosphorus appears to stop this condition of Cepa.

(Farrington)

ARSENIC-ALBUM : It is very efficacious in the 30th po-
tency every half an hour for 4 to 6 doses for the usual colds due to
change of temperature.

CAUSTICUM : In influenza or.what is now called La Grippe,

it disputes for first place with Eupatorium-Perforatum and Rhus-

tox. All three have a tired, sore, bruised sensation all over the body,

_and all have soreness in the chest when coughing, but if involuntary
micturition is present, Causticum wins. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

HEPAR SULPH : in coryza, if it is given at the commence-
ment, it spoils the case. It is more suitable in the advanced stage.
(Farrington)

MERCURIUS : It is not deep enough to cure the whole consti-
tution in psoric. cases that are constantly taking cold. It cures the
cold at once, but implants its own nature and the patient catches
cold oftener. It should not be given often, not oftener than twice ina
winter, Kali-iod. is a better substitute. Do not give many doses of
Merc. in psoric cases; look for a deeper medicine.

(Dr. J.T.Kent)

79


--- Page 84 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

~ NAT-MUR. : It not only removes the tendency'to intermittent,
but restores the patient to health, and takes away the tendency of
colds-the susceptibility to colds and to periodicity.

It is the susceptibility that 1s removed. We know that every at-
tack predisposes to another attack. Each attack of ague is more
destructive than the previous.

NUX-VOM. : Is specific in influenza if given early.

PULS. : If Puls. is prescribed in the beginning of coryza it
usually spoils the case. It should not be given in the beginning of a
cold. Unless the temperature and other symptoms decide.

(Farrington)
When Puls. symptoms develops in bronchitis better respond
- with Kali-sulph. © (Dr. D.M. Barland)
COUGH

ACONITE : The child is put to bed and rises up from the first
sleep perhaps at 10 or 11 o’clock, grasps the throat, coughs vio-
lently a croupy, choking cough with hoarse bark.

. (Dr. J.T. Kent)

Nineteen out of twenty cases of croup arising from exposure to
dry cold air will be cured by Aconite.
“ (Dr. E.B. Nash)

CAUSTICUM : No Homoeopath can afford to be without un-
derstanding of: Causticum upon the respiratory organs.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

PULS. : Puls. should not be selected for loose cough, unless
you are sure that all the symptoms of the case call for it. It often
tightens such cough without curing it.

(Farrington)
80



--- Page 85 ---
DISEASES

HEPAR-SULPH : Great sensitiveness to open air, putting the ©
hand from under the bed cover brings on the ” cough (Bar., Hepar).

RHUS-TOX : For instance, in Rhus-tox loose cough i in the
morning, the tight, dry one in the evening.
(Dr. EB. Nash)

DIABETES

ARSENIC : It will often excell in relieving the pruritis of the
diabetic patients who have syphilis as a complicating factor.

NAT-MUR : In Nat-mur of course the intense thirst of salt is
well known and keeps pace with the hunger. Now this is the case
with diabetes, for which Nat-mur. is curative if otherwise indicated.
In all these cases, it must be used in high for we get the low in our
food.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

DIPHTHERIA

BELLADONNA.: When you want to give this remedy in diph-
theria, be certain that it is the remedy or you will loose. valuable
time when it is administered in diphtheria. It must be indicated on
other symptoms than those belonging to the membrane.

(Farrington) —

KALI-BICH. : [have, with it cured many cases of diphtheritic
croup, and of late years never given it below the 30th potency be-
cause abundant experience convinced me that it does better than the
low triturations. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

81


--- Page 86 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

KALI-CHLORICUM : On account of its action upon the kid-
ney, kali-chloricum is a dangerous drug in diptheria and cases have
been killed by ts unwise administration. (Allen)

“Diphtherinum” high in single dose will cure in every case
that crude anti-toxin will, and it is not only easy to administer but
safe and entirely free from dangerous sequalac. Besides it is
Homoeopathic.

DROPSY

APIS : Sensation as if every breath would be his last is very
characteristic, and occurs not only in dropsical troubles of the chest,
but seems also to be a nervous symptom.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

BLATTA : Blatta orientalis has cured bad cases of general
dropsy after Apis, Apoc., Digitalis failed. .

COLCHICUM : Often cures dropsy after Apis or Arsenic
failed.

ARSENIC-ALBUM : After giving Arsenic in dropsy, and
oedema of lungs, in heart disease, dropsical swelling speedily dis-
appears (a copious diuresis sometimes sets in). Thereafter it is use-
less to continue it for a longer period in some vain hope

(Dr. Boehr)

NAT-MUR : In dropsy after the malaria, Nat-mur when it acts
curatively, generally brings back the original chill. The only cure -
known to man is from above downwards, from within out and in
reverse order of coming, when it is otherwise, there is only improve-
ment not cure when the symptoms return there is hope that is the
road to cure, there is no other.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

82


--- Page 87 ---
. DISEASES

Dropsy in chest-with organic disease-Apoc, Spig Dropsy in chest
with asthma-psor.

EAR -
_ FERRUM-PHOS : In earache do not use Ferrum-phos below
12x potency. The low will often work when the high fails.
(Dr. T.K. Moore)

SULPHUR : Sulphur should not be trusted in otitis in children.

It is a remedy which serves the interest of the organism and _ -

dis-serves the local interest. Therefore, in children suffering from
adenoids, even if the nose alone is affected, Sulphur 30 may, act
well on the general health, be dangerous because it will cause an
otitis to appear. (F. Bernoville)

EPILEPSY

KALI-BROMATUM : Now a word about Kali-bromatum as
an anti-epileptic remedy. I do not believe that it ever cured epilepsy.
In almost all cases in which it has been given, it has not cured but
simply suppressed the desire and thus has produced a worse condi-
tion than the one previously existing namely imbecility.

(Farrington)

KALI-BROM. Palliates but does not cure. Syphilinum cured.
LACHESIS : It is recommended in epilepsy and. locomotor

ataxia but I have never seen good effects from it.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

SILICEA : I have several times found a silicea child suffering
from epileptiform spasms which were always worse at new moon.
A few doses of Silicea 200 set them all right.

83


--- Page 88 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

EPILEPSY : If you expect to find, in the fit, the remedy that
cures you will be mistaken. When an acute mimicking manifesta-
tion of disease follows several times the same beaten track details
are hard to find. You will find these symptoms by getting the state
of the patient before the attack.

Epilepsy is not a disease, you cannot prescribe for it. The symp-
toms which represent the nature of sickness are not in the fit, but
those which the patient has had from infancy up to the time of the
fit.

EPISTAXIS

NATRUM-SULPH : I have known this remedy in several cases
to produce violent epistaxis when wrongly given in a recent case.
The 200th potency produced nosebleed, vomiting and purging after
every dose taken. (E. Wright)

EYES

ACONITE : If Aconite is ever to be thought of, we will find
mental uneasiness, worry or fear accompanying a most trifling ail-
ments such as inflammation of the eyelids.

(Dr. J.H. Clarks)

ARNICA : [have often relieved sewing girl or students of pains
in the eyes from this cause and have sometimes enabled them to lay
off the glasses that had been prescribed by the opticians.

It is much better to use this remedy in a weakened power of
accomodation than to try and compensate it with artificial lenses.
Of course where the impaired vision is purely optical this cannot be
done. . ( a
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

84


--- Page 89 ---
DISEASES

BELLADONNA : Let me warn you against the use of Bella-
donna for the pains of glaucoma which generally resemble those of
Belladona never give it low for that condition and watch closely if
you give it in the 30th potency or 200th.

__MERCURIUS : No form of iritis has been noticed in worker
of mercury and though the drug has been prescribed with success in
syphilitic iritis, another preparation of mercury Merc-Cor in almost
specific. Therefore do not give Mercury in iritis, it is an allopathic
, Legacy of no value. (Dewey)
: RHUS-TOX : It is beneficial to control the threatened iritis
‘and formation of pus.

FEVER

_ ACONITE : The most violent attack of fever will subside in a
- night if Aconite is the remedy. (Dr. J.T. Kent)

«Do not think of Aconite in fever unless the patient is present
with Aconite fever. In Aconite fever the symptoms are, sensitive-
ness to light, great restlessness with fever, eyes staring with pupils
contracted, violent aching with inflammation of the deep structures.
of the ball.

(Dr. J.T.Kent)
Acon‘te is never thought of in cases of blood poisoning 1.¢. in
scarlet fever, typhoid fever etc. Never give Aconite for any form of
zymotic history. Aconite is of no use in the slow coming continuous
fever. In Aconite, fever has short and sharp attack and is not related
to an intermittent fever. (Dr. J.T.Kent)

The type of Aconite fever is continuous not only intermit-
tent. It has no symptoms in its pathogenesis which points to inter-
mittency. Beginning with the initial chill or chills, the dry heat fol-
lows and continues until sweat brings relief? Then again it must be

85


--- Page 90 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

bome in mind that fever is not the disease itself but merely a symp-
tom which is necessary for the proper development of the disease.
you should not merely attempt to remove this fever by administra-
tion of Aconite. Take scarlatina for instance, the fever may run high,
the-skin may be hot and dry and pulse hard, Superficially, Aconite
appears to be indicated, yet you know with other symptoms present
like backache, vomiting, sore throat and existence of disease in
neighbourhood that scarlatina is developing. You know removing
this fever may take away a symptom which is necessary for the
proper development of rash belonging to the disease. Therefore
Aconite is rarely to be thought of in scarlatina.

(Farrington)

It is never to be thought of, never to be given, in any form of
malaria or septic poisoning as it is not a remedy to be used in any
stage of the disease.

(Pierce)

When indicated by the exciting cause, Aconite i is nearly always
injurious in first stage of Typhoid fever.
(Pierce)

Aconite is contraindicated in fever of patients having chronic
pulmonary T.B. because of the liability to contract cold after its
use.

(Paige)

Stop the medicine, Aconite, when the skin i is moist or when the
patient breaks out in sweat. ', “4
GGhosal)

Many so called homoeopaths have fallen into similar error by
concluding that. Aconite did quickly cure in some cases having high
grade fever, that, therefore, it was always the remedy with which to
treat cases having high fever. They even fall into the routine habit of
prescribing this remedy for the first stage of inflammatory

86


--- Page 91 ---
é

DISEASES

affections, and follow it with other remedies more appropriate to
the whole case further on.
oar ‘ (Dr.E.B. Nash)

Dunhum writes Aconite is never to be given first to subdue the
fever and then some other remedy “to meet the case”, never to be
alternated with the other drugs for the purpose, as is often alleged,
for” controlling the fever, “If the fever be such as to require Aco=
nite, no other drug 1s indicated. If other drugs seem indicated, one
should be thought which meets the fever as well, for many drugs
besides Aconite produce fever, each after its kind. oo
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

APIS-MEL : Aggravation when near fire. Amelioration from
colds, no thirst.in dropsy and fever.

ARSENIC-ALB ; Do not give Arsenic early in typhoid fever
unless the symptoms call for it unmistakably. Here it is especially
dangerous to give it too soon. :
(Dr. J.T.Kent)

It is one of our best remedies for fevers of a typhoid character.
So useful is it that Boehr says “since Ars. is, more than any other
remedy, adapted to the worst forms of infectious diseases it seems

‘wrong to delay its administration until the symptoms indicating it.

are developed in their most malignant intensity”, and further, “our
advice, therefore, is that Ars. should be given more frequently than
has been customary from the very beginning of the attack, and that
we should not wait until the disease has fully developed its perni-
cious character. “ I do not think this is sound reasoning or good
advice, for I have never found any mule by which I could decide
from the beginning that a case would later on develop into a case of
pernicious or malignant character which would never call for the
exhibition of Ars. while we need not wait for a case to develop to °
that “Most Malignant” intensity which calls for Ars., we would not

87.


--- Page 92 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

on the other hand be justified in giving Ars. or any other remedy in
anticipation of a condition.which might never come. Arsenic 1s not
the only remedy capable of curing these malignant cases, and how
do we know afterall that it may not be Muriatic-acid or Carbo-veg.
that will be the remedy after the case is developed. There is no safe
or scientific rule but to treat the case with the indicated remedy at
any and all stages of the disease, without trying to treat the expected
conditions or further possibilities.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

In typhoid fever Ars. Alb. does irreparable injury if not...
unmistakeably indicated. :
(H.C. Marrow)

BELLADONNA : Remember Bell. patient does not have con-
tinued fever, it is not suitable in typhoid. It will bring down the fever?
in a night, will allay the delirium, but how is it in the next night? on
comes the fever and the pa-ient is worse than he was before. Simply
because Be// cannot hold what it starts with, it is not suitable. It has
not the continued feature in it. We are led to a medicine that corre-
sponds to continous fevers, and such must be selected when we go
into the typhoid state.

(Dr. J.T.Kent)

It has not the gradual rise and the gradual fall like a continued
fever. (Dr. J.T. Kent)

FERRUM-PHOS .: It is the remedy which is usually prescribed
when there is fever without any attendant symptoms.

(Talks on classical Homoeopathy by George Vithoulkas)

IPECACUANHA : I have cured many cases of fever and ague
by the first prescription, thus saving myself a good deal of unneces-
sary seeking and comparing whatever may be said in condemnation
of this loose prescribing, it is certainly preferable to the inevitable

88.


--- Page 93 ---
DISEASES

quinine prescription and do infinitely less harm. It can cure more
cases than quinine, but both can cure the case to which they are
homoeopathic and that in the potentised form of the drug we have
such clear cut indication for the use of many remedies that we need
not fail once where the allopaths do twenty times, with their indis-
criminate quinine treatment. (Jahr)

MERCURIUS : Is not indicated in typhoid fever unless there
be clearly defined icteroid symptoms, consequently you will not of-
ten have occasion to give it for this symptom; profuse sweat with-
out relief unless is well defined by the icteriod and bowel symptoms
that you are certain that you have the proper indicated remedy.

(Farrington)

It is so rarely indicated in typhoid fever that some careful pre-
scribers say “never”. (H.C. Marrow)

It cures lingering febrile conditions analogous to the typhoid
state, but caused by suppressed ear discharge. I have cured cases
that were due to packing the car with Borax., lodoform etc. The
patient having first a remittent and later a continued fever. This
would go on for five or six weeks and be relieved only when the
discharge turned with a dose, of Mere.

(Dr. J-T. Kent)

NAT-MUR. : should never be given during fever paroxysms.
(H.L. Allen)

This is a great remedy for old cases of malaria. Do not use it
lower than the 30th.
(Anslurtz)

It not only removes the tendency to intermittent, but restores the
_ patient to health and takes away the tendency to cold, the suscepti-
bility to colds and to periodicity. It is the susceptibility that, is re-
moved. We know that every attack predisposes to,another attack.
Each attack of ague is more destructive than the previous one. The

89


--- Page 94 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

drugs used increase the susceptibility, the homoeopathic remedy
removes the susceptibility. Homoeopathic treatment tends to sim-
plify the human economy and to make disease more easily man-
aged. Unless this susceptibility be eradicated, man goes down lower
and lower into emaciation from above downwards.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

It is one of the greatest malaria remedies, but it is full of order
like China. Sepia is full of disorder. In a case confused by remedies .
think of Calc., Ars., Sulph., Sep., and Ipec. Never give China or
Nat-mur., for irregular symptom and stages.
* (Dr. J.T.Kent) |

FEVER BLISTER

Some 80% of fever blisters can be quickly cured often in 36hrs.
with Nat-mur. In 6x, 12x or 30th potencies. I have seen some cases
of fever blisters cured as if by magic with Ranunculus-B. or Ra-
nunculus-S., which do not respond to Nat-mur. in any potency.

(E. petris Hoyle) «
a:

OPIUM : In alternating states( as in intermittent fever) a mod-+%.
erate dose of Opium given during the cold stage quickly deprives —
the patient of life.

(Hahnemann)

PHOSPHORUS : Do not give Phosphorus in all incurable cases
after the fever has been reduced as it will intensify fever and will do
just the opposite.

In all ailments with mtense fever where Phosphorus is called

- for, a single dose will bring down such fever. if repeated after the
fever has subsided, it will do irrepairable mischief.
(Bhanja)

90


--- Page 95 ---
DISEASES

In all incurable cases, after the fever has been reduced, Phos.
should not be given as it will intensify the fever and do just what it
was to avoid.

(Thousand Remedies)

PHOSPHORIC-ACID : It is never to be used where general
irritability is present and probably many failures are owing to its
misuse in this particular.

(Dewey)

Let us remember that the profound weakness and depression of
Phos-ac. is upon the sensorium and nervous system and will be
there whether diarrhoea, is present or not. It is markedly so in ty-
phoids, so I can fully attest from abundant observation.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

PULS. : In measles, do not give it in the beginning, so when the
fever is high in that case you should begin the case with Aconite or
Gelsemium as is indicated by the symptoms.

(Farrington)

When the first premonitary symptoms of measles make their
appearance, puls. should not be given to women while they have
their courses. In the case of this kind it once arrested the menses,
suppressed the eruption which was on the point of making its ap-
pearance and developed threatening cerebral symptoms.

(Shar)

RHUS-TOX. : Whenever in fevers or even inflammatory dis-
eases the sensorium becomes cloudy (smoky) or stupefaction sets
in, with low grade of muttering delirium, dry tongue etc. We think
of Rhus-tox.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Rhus and Arsenicum are often indicated in typhoids, Aconite
seldom or never, but all three are equally restless remedies.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

91


--- Page 96 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

SANTONINE : Lower preprations are often toxic. Do not give
it to a child with fever or constipation.

Dr. W.A. Dewey has observed convulsions produced by its use
in too low potencies.

SEPIA : Is given in evening because if given in the morning it
will produce a sufficient aggravation to leave the patient feeling
quite useless for that day.

(Dr. R.A.F. Jack)

In old cases of suppressed malaria, Sepia brings back the chill,
but its most useful sphere is after a bad selection of remedy and the
cases becomes confused.

VERATRUM-VIRIDE : Has great power of reducing tem-
perature but it should be used with caution as it depresses the heart.

HAY-FEVER

It will only be cured if the patient is curable, but not if his
constitution is so broken down that he is incurable his hay fever will
not be cured.

Hay fever is often an easy thing to palliate with short acting
remedies, they will cut short an attack in a few days. But for the
cure patient must be treated in the interim and according to his
symptoms, when the hay fever symptoms are present he has no other;
one group is manifested at one time and another group at another
time and all the symptoms must be gathered and the case treated
accordingly.

Hay fever belongs to a low constitution, which must be built up
before the hay fever will cease. It is an expression of psora which
comes up once a year and the psoric miasm must be changed. Ina
few years most subjects can be changed but not in one season so do
not be disappointed.

92


--- Page 97 ---
—

_ DISEASES

Hay fever is a psoric sickness, the attack is not the best thing to
prescribe for if it is too violent, short acting remedy may be selected
that will mitigate it.

INTERMITTENT FEVER

Intermittent fever - follow “Eup-per” with “Nat-mur.” or “Se-
pia,” if “Eup” though indicated is not sufficient to root out.

Homoeopathic remedy will cure, every time if you get the nght
remedy. If there is a failure the case is mixed up so that no one may
be able to cure it.

It is not an uncommon thing in intermittent fever when the rem-
edy has been administered at the close of the paroxysm to come
within 24hrs. after the administration of the medicine; these mixed
cases are often in a state of disorder. One who does not know this
would immediately show the white feather, would be alarmed; would
be afraid the patient was getting worse but you have to wait for the
subsidence of attack and you will see you have broken its cycle and
periodicity.

In intermittent fever time for administration of the dose, is the
close of paroxysm.

FOREIGN BODY

CALC-CARB : has no such tearing down nature in it. It does
not establish inflammation around foreign bodies and tends to sup-
port them out but cause a fibrous deposit around bullets and other
foreign substance in the flesh. It causes tubercular deposits to harden
and contract and become encysted.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

93


--- Page 98 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

SILICEA : Promotes expulsion of foreign bodies from the tis-
sues i.c., fish bones, needles; bone splinters etc.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

MALE GENITALIA

. LYCOPODIUM $: is one of our best remedies for impotence
(Agnus-castus). An old man marries his second or third wife and
finds himself not “equal to the occasion:. It is very embarrassing for
the whole family. A dose of Lycopodium sets the things all right and
makes the doctor a warm friend on both sides of house.

Young men from onanism or sexual excess becomes impotent.
_ The penis becomes small., cold and relaxed. The desire is as strong ©
as ever, and perhaps more so, but he cannot perform. (Selenium, ~
‘aladium). 1 have known apparently hopeless cases of this kind —
cured by the use of this remedy, high single dose at intervals of a
week or more. Give it low, however, if you want to, but do not

blame me if you do not succeed.
(Dr. E.B.Nash)

PHOSPHORIUS : is considered as a great remedy for the weak-
ness of the genital organs. In Phosphorus the genital indications are
extreme excitement, too active erection, a disorderly strength of the
genital organs. Do not give it in impotency or in weakness as this is
_ often associated with very feeble constitutions and it not only fails
to cure but also adds to the weakness.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

PHIMOSIS : Can be cured by medicines if it depends upon
some trouble that is in itself curable. Congenital phimosis can not
_ be cured by medicine.

94


--- Page 99 ---
\

DISEASES

FEMALE GENITALIA

CALCAREA CARB: Is generally indispensable and curative
when the catamania appears few days before the period esp. when
the flow is considerable. But ifthe catamania appears at the regular
period or a little latter, Calc. is almost never useful even if the
catamania should be rather profuse.

CAUSTICUM : This is like Nux-v. and Canth., and I once
cured a chronic case of cystitis in a married woman, which had
baffled the best efforts of several old school physician, eminent for
their skill, for years. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

CARBO-VEG : The woman feels best when she has more or
less of a leucorrhoea it seems a sort of protection. These discharges
that we need every day are dried up and controlled by local treat-
ments, by washes and by local applications of every kind and the
patient put into the hands of the undertaker or made a miserable
wreck. If these catarrhal patients are not healed from within out, the
discharges had better be allowed to go on. While these discharges
exist the patient is comfortable.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

FERRUM-MET. : Women suffer from haemorrhage from the
uterus, especially during and after the climacteric period.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

She is feeble, she suffers from palpitation and dyspnoea, she
has great weakness with inability to do any thing like work, she
feels that she must lie down-yet the face is flushed. This is called
PSEUDO-PLETHORA.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

HEPAR-SULPH : The leucorrhoea is so copious that she is
compelled to wear a napkin, and the napkin, I have been told by
women who have been cured by Hepar., are so offensive that they

95


--- Page 100 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

must be taken away and washed at once because the odor permeates
the rooms.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

KALI-CARB. : has cured a number of cases of fibroid tumor
long before it was time for the critical period to cure.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

KALI-BICH. : Of course leucorrhoea of both the ropy and ~
jelly like variety come under this remedy and many fine cures have
resulted from its use.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

LILIUM : Should the menstrual flow continue while the pa-
tient is lying down it will contra-indicate Lilium-tig., tts leucor-
rhoea is brownish, excruciating and often fetid.

(Royal).

The uterine symptoms are sometimes marked so as to be over=
looked for the time by the violence of heart symptoms.

LYCOPODIUM : In girls, it is a remedy for amenorrhoea with
non-development of breasts. In such girls it makes the coarse
(Dr. Leon Renara)

PULSATILLA : Do not pour down mother tincture of Puls. by
the 10 drop doses, as the manner of those who do not believe in
potentized remedies. You may give Puls. in the high, higher and
highest potencies, and confidently expect the best results. I have
often seen the delayed menses of young girls of Puls. temperament
appear promptly and naturally under the M.M. of Swan and C.M,
of Fincke (also with Kali-c., Tuberculinum, and others).

(Dr. EB. Nash)

LEUCORRHOEA IN YOUNG GIRLS : If there were no
specific reasons for other remedies, I start treatment in young girls
with leucorrhoea by giving Puls. If the discharge is thick like cream

96 f


--- Page 101 ---
_ DISEASES

then Sulphur or Sepia according to the indications. If these are not
sufficient to effect a cure then Calcarea or Graph. come in ques-
tion. Carbo-veg. succeeds when Puls. falls.

(Dr. Wassily)

SEPIA : Sepia and Bell. are most reliable in uterine conges-
tion. (Dr. T.K. Moore)

TUBERCULINUM : One case of retarded menstruation in a
young girl who had greatly enlarged tonsils and who began to grow
tired and weak, pale and short breathed on any exercise. The menses
appeared twice under the action of Puls., but at intervals of several
other remedies to give her any benefit, she took one dose of
Tuberculinum 1M with prompt, easy and natural appearance of the
menses and corresponding improvement in other respects, and 1s
now attending school in apparent good health.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Most violent cases of dysmenorrhoea have existed a long time
since the beginning of the menstruation in women who always needed
Sulphur, give Sulphur.

If you select a remedy merely on the kind of pain, on the sensi-
tiveness of the uterus, on the appearance of the flow, that is, on the
pelvic symptoms, you will make a failure. You must treat the pa-
tient even if the pelvic symptoms do not fall under the generals;
when the generals agree “Sulphur” will cure dysmenorrhoea even
though you cannot fit it to the pelvic symptoms. The generals al-
ways precede and rule in every case.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

In many instances the pelvic symptoms are prominent and all
other symptoms clouded; there is a gushing flow, the blood is hot
etc. and there are only a few symptoms but the next time after a
dose of “Sulphur” or “Psorinum” you see the woman, she is quiet
enough to give other symptoms and in the course of a few days

97


--- Page 102 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

more symptoms come out as the haemorrhagic state isan outcome
of the chronic condition.

There is a natural tendency for a fibroid to cease to grow at the
climacteric period and afterwards to shrivel and that this takes place
without any treatment, but the appropriate remedies will cause that
haemorrhage to cease, will cause that tumour to cease to grow and
after a few days there will be a grand shrinkage in size.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

GLANDS

DROSERA : It can be used as a pathological remedy for tu-
bercular glands.

When Drosera is given in glandular cases, one notices not only
the diminution in the size of the gland, but that the old scars fade
away, get free and come to the surface, that discolouration goes,
and that when a gland does break down under Drosera, it behaves
in a very restrained manner, with a small opening, little discharge
and that it leaves practically nothing to mark what has taken place.

(M.L. Tyler)

GOITRE

IODUM : Let me put a word of waming at this point about the
external use of Iodum for goitre. Never use Iodum externally unless
you are giving it internally. I have known many cases of rheuma-
tism and pulmonary troubles to develop the disposition to goitre by
the external use of Iodum.

(George Royal).

98


--- Page 103 ---
—

DISEASES

I have cured many cases of goitre with lodum CM, every night
for four nights, after the full moon was waning.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

GOUT

Benzoic-acid is useful after Colchicum fails in gout.
The more Benzoic acid is used in gout, the more it will be prized.

COLCHICUM $: It is always set down in the text books for
rheumatism, articular, migrating and gouty and I have often tried it,
but never with anything like the success of our other rheumatic rem-
edies. I have been greatly disappointed in it here.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

KALI-CARB. : is dangerous in old gouty cases. It is a sharp
and two edged sword. Do not undertake to give this medicine with a
view to curing these old cases of gout when the nodosities are nu-
merous. Do not give that constitutional medicine that should have
been administered to these patients twenty years ago, because there
is no reaction enough in the life of the patient to turn him into order
‘and he will be destroyed. It seems paradoxical to say it, but to cure
him is to kill him. The vital action that is necessary to restore him to
health would practically tear his frame work to pieces. You may not
believe these things. You are not obliged to. But think about them,
and some day after practicing a while and making numerous mis-
takes in attempting to cure incurable, you will admit the awful power
of homoeopathic medicines. They are simply dreadful in old gout
cases and old cases of bright’s disease, in advanced cases of pthisis
when there are many tubercles, beware of Kali-c. given too high.

(Dr. J.T. Kent) .

The chance of injuring such a patient is very much less when a
single dose of the 6th or the 30th patency is administered.

991


--- Page 104 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

(Bhanja)

A word of warning may well be given against the use of Kali-c.
in the inflammatory rheumatic states. It takes a long time to undo
the mischief that this remedy does especially if used in higher po-
tencies. The reaction it is too deep and lasting so that few could
withstand the intensity of bringing up those conditions which this
remedy could have cured had it been exhibited before the rheumatic
fever showed itself.

(H.A. Roberts)

RHUS-TOX : Ifa patient complains of rheumatic pains with it
there is present restlessness and inability to keep quiet, consider
Trombidium before jumping to the conclusion that it is a Rhus-tox.
case.

VERAT-ALB. : It 1s said to be a good remedy for rheumatism,
which is worse in wet weather and which drives the patient out of
bed. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

Arthritis deformans responds to Antim. crud. Enlarged joints
after acute rheumatism are rapidly reduced to normal size under the
action of Kali-mur. sometimes after they had resisted other rem-
edies for a long time.

HAIR

ARSENIC-ALBUM : Is an excellent remedy for baldness, if ;
the hair fall out in consequence of an impoverished condition of the 3
follicle, the scalp and the skin generally are very dry and the patient’s -
assimilative powers are impaired.
(Dr. Charles Hempel)

100


--- Page 105 ---
=

‘ DISEASES

CALC-CARB. : The hair fall out, not in the regular way such
as occur in old age, but in patches here and there.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

KALI-CARB. : When Kali-c. fails, Anantherum may be tried
in falling of hair from eye brows.
(Dr. R.B. Das)

HEADACHE

CANNABIS INDICA : Is the most useful medicine we pos-
sess for diminishing the frequency of the paroxysms of migraine.
/ (Dr. Ringer)

~ HEPAR-SULPH : The sick headaches of women are a type of
case in which a nosode may be required. Although, these headaches
may be relieved by such remedies as Iris versicolor, they are not
really cured by them and have a tendency to secure with increasing
severity. Such a condition may be permanently cured by
Tuberculinum in high potency, administered at infrequent intervals
between the acute attacks. (Dr. Wemo)

KALI-BICH : When you are struck with a Kali-bi. migraine
that does net respond, always remember Jris.
(Dr. D.M. Borland)

LACHESIS : Headache extending into nose, comes, mostly in
acute catarrh, especially when the discharge has been suppressed or
stops after sleep. This kind of headache is often found in hay fever,
with frequent and violent paroxysms of sneezing. Now if the hay
fever paroxysms of sneezing are decidedly worse after sleeping even
in the day time, Lachesis 200th may stop the whole business for the
season. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

10]


--- Page 106 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

It is seldom. that you. will see: Lachesis headache without car-
diac difficulty. a
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

NAT-MUR. : It is apt to occur after the menstrual period, as if
caused by loss of blood and you know that China also has throb-
bing headache in such cases. With Nat.m the throbbing headache
occurs whether the menses be scanty or profuse.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

It is one of out best remedies for chronic headache:

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

By the way, a word of warning may be needed to cure the most
terrible headaches but do not give it during the severe attack at the
risk of a fearful aggravation. Give its acute Bryonia for the imme-
diate pain and to palliate and the curative drug later on when the
attack is over.

(Tyler)

Nat-mur. also cures the headaches of school girls and here it
may be difficult to choose between it and Calcarea-phos. both rem-
edies also being particularly adapted to anaemic states. Indeed, I
have sometimes missed and had to give calc-phos, when Nat. failed
and vice versa, because I could not make the choice.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

MELLILOTUS : A tincture of the sweet clover or the IX dilu-
tion 1s a remedy for those headaches or neuralgias that drive the
patient wild so that he wants to bump his head against the wail or
floor; is close to delirium. If it acts it acts quickly. Do not adminis-
ter it over a period of time i.e two or more days. Two or three doses
in half an hour will do all that can be expected.

(Sushutz)

Attempt should be made to cure a chronic sick headache before .
the senile decline.

102


--- Page 107 ---
DISEASES

~ If a headache is interrupted the patient will tend to phthisis.

When a periodic sick headache is interrupted by Sangunaria, a
deeper drug an anti-psoric is not given the headache will return or
something worse will come. In case it was followed by an epithe-
lioma which was cured by “Phos.” his constitutional medicine.

HEART

ACONITE : in hypertrophy of the heart from valvular disease
it may do great harm.
(Farrington):

It has great distress in the heart and chest.
: (Dr. E.B. Nash) |

Sudden attack of pain in the heart with dyspnoea. Great suffo-
cation from this fear and from anxiety he breaks out in profuse
sweat he is drenched with sweat and yet his skin is hot.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

Aconite had characteristically dry, hot skin and no sweat. Aco-
nite has great distress in heart and chest.
* (Dr. MLL. Tyler)

In true carditis, pericarditis Aconite 30 in watery solution '
generally accomplishes every thing that can be desired.

(Dr. Jahr)

ADRENALIN : must not be too frequently repeated owing to

cardiac and arterial lesion. For homoeopathic cases 2x to 6x poten- |

cies, are better. (Boericke)

ARSENIC : Is.a dangerous remedy in heart especially if or-
ganic, as it is is apt to cause parenchymatous nephritis.
(Kent)

103


--- Page 108 ---
_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING

BELLADONNA : If during epidemic, the first premonitary
symptoms attack a person in health such as angina with a peculiar
scarlet redness may sometimes be associated. Bell. in such circum-
stances is rather hurtful than useful in as much as it may impede the
breaking out of the exanthema and by this means exposes the lives
of the patient to great danger.

(Dr. Jahr)

DIGITALIS : In heart affections you should not use Digitalis
indiscriminately or carelessly. In organic disease of heart, Digitalis
must be used with extreme caution, because it may hasten the pe-
riod when nature is no longer able to compensate by the hypertro-
phy of the heart muscles for the interference in the circulation. Na-
ture thus may be compelled to give out. Then the heart yields to the
pressure of blood within cavities and begins to dilate, and we shall
have the train of symptoms The warning is particularly applicable
to the use of drug in large duses. Given this it may relieve for a time .
but it only. hastens the fatal end.

(Farrington) *

Digitalis presents in its indication, the well known symptomatic —
triology : arterial hypertension, oliguria and oedema. The serum of
eel seems better adapted to cases of hypertension with oliguria, with-
out oedema. We should bear in mind that the elective action of the
eel’s serum is on the kidney and I believe that we can well assert |
that if Digitalis 1s a cardiac, the eel’s serum is a renal remedy.

(Boericke)

One day I saw an old but very strong man staggering across the
- road towards my office. I thought he was drunk, but on close obser-
vation I noticed that his face looked purple, his lips bluish, and I
stepped out and helped him in. He sat down and could not for a few
minutes speak a word, but sat and struggled for breath. His pulse
was very irregular and intermittent. He had been obliged to give up
all manual labour and dared not to go away from home on his busi-
ness, that of a bridge builder. He said he expected to die with this

104


--- Page 109 ---
DISEASES

heart disease. I gave him Digitalis 2, a few drops in water. Ina few
days, I saw him shoveling snow from the walk in front of his dwell-
ing “Hello” he said, “I have no heart disease,” and I saw him often
after that and he told me that medicine cured him of those spells.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

HYDROCYANIC-ACID : In treating heart cases do not be-
gin too soon with Arsenic, hydrocyanic.acid or Lachesis. Begin ,
rather with Aconite, Spongia, Spigelia, Bryonia, or phosphorus:
Arsenic and such remedies come in later. If you give them too soon,
you will weaken the patient unless you have a complete picture for
the remedy. Do not give in the first stage. It is usually indicated in
the last stage of the disease. (Farrington)

KALI-CARB. : Is indicated in cardiac inflammation, in en-
docarditis and pericarditis, when these sharp stitching pains are —
prominent.

There is considerable dyspnoea which is somewhat relieved by
sitting in an upright posture. Do not give it too soon in the case. It is .
not an early remedy in cardiac diseases. It is indicated rather late _
when there is a deposit on the cardiac valves. In such a case as this
Spigelia is apt to procede the exhibition of Kali-c. ;
(Farrington)

KALMIIA : Is a valuable remedy in rheumatism, when it af-
fects the chest. The pains with affection of heart are sharp, taking:
away the breath of the patient, almost suffocates. Kalmia is espe-
cially useful when gout or rheumatism shifts from joints to heart
especially after external application to the joint. If you give Arnica.
internally and apply it locally and if it were the indicated remedy
there would be no danger of metastasis. But if someone were to
apply the tincture of Aconite to the affected joimts, there would be
danger of inflammation, travelling to some more vital part.

(Farrington)

105


--- Page 110 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

BELLADONNA : If during epidemic, the first premonitary
symptoms attack a person in health such as angina with a peculiar
scarlet redness may sometimes be associated. Bell. in such circum-
stances is rather hurtful than useful in as much as it may impede the
breaking out of the exanthema and by this means exposes the lives
of the patient to great danger.

(Dr. Jahr)

DIGITALIS : In heart affections you should not use Digitalis
indiscriminately or carelessly. In organic disease of heart, Digitalis
must be used with extreme caution, because it may hasten the pe-
riod when nature is no longer able to compensate by the hypertro-
phy of the heart muscles for the interference in the circulation. Na-
ture thus may be compelled to give out. Then the heart yields to the
pressure of blood within cavities and begins to dilate, and we shall
have the train of symptoms The warming is particularly applicable
to the use of drug in large duses. Given this it may relieve for a time
but it only hastens the fatal end.

(Farrington)

Digitalis presents in its indication, the well known symptomatic
triology : arterial hypertension, oliguria and oedema. The serum of
eel seems better adapted to cases of hypertension with oliguria, with-
out oedema. We should bear in mind that the elective action of the
eel’s serum is on the kidney and I believe that we can well assert
that if Digitalis is a cardiac, the eel’s serum is a renal remedy.

(Boericke)

One day I saw an old but very strong man staggering across the
road towards my office. I thought he was drunk, but on close obser-
vation I noticed that his face looked purple, his lips bluish, and I
stepped out and helped him in. He sat down and could not for a few
minutes speak a word, but sat and struggled for breath. His pulse
was very irregular and intermittent. He had been obliged to give up
all manual labour and dared not to go away from home on his busi-
ness, that of a bridge builder. He said he expected to die with this

104


--- Page 111 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

I remember a patient, of old syphilitic, who was told that if he
made a violent move he would die, the valves of his heart were so
badly affected. he had all the murmurs that it seemed possible from
the heart valves. He had travelled all over and had taken large doses’
of Mercury, and his syphilitic condition had to a great extent been’
suppressed, until finally the whole trouble had located in the heart.
Kalmia removed all the dyspnoea and palpitation in a few months,
and it was nearly two years before there was marked return of the
symptoms and a repetition put him in a state of health, so that he
needed no more medicine. This shows what a deep acting remedy
Kalmia is, how long it may act, what wonderful changes it may
effect. A remedy must be capable of going deep into life to do such |
thing. / (Dr. J.T-Kent)

All the organs are related to each other, but especially heart and
kidneys when the kidneys are not working well, the heart is very...
often troublesome. All through the varying form of bright’s disease _
the heart is troublesome. Difficulties of breathing, difficult heart
action, with albuminuria. It will relieve the breathing. Again, asso-__
ciated with kidney affections, we have many eye complaints, *
difficulties of vision, and these also especially call for this remedy. —
It is often indicated in bright’s disease, with disturbance of vision, °
occuring pregnancy. .

VERATRUM VIRIDE : We must not forget the action of Verat.
viride on heart as well as on the phlegmasia because in the begin-
ning, the remedy to a remarkable degree controls the cardiac action
but in two cases cited by Dr. Bodmen, of pneumonia, in children the
administration of Verat. viride given late brought a marked cardiac
weakness. In the congestive stage of pneumonia when the heart is
obviously weak or is slightly degenerated, Murry considers Aconite
dangerous and inferior to Verat. viride.

(Das Gupta)

106


--- Page 112 ---
“DISEASES

H.L.Allen warns that Verat viride should not be given simply to
bring down the pulse or control the hearts action but like any other
remedy, for the totality of symptoms. .
a (Thousand Remedies)

HYPERTENSION

ALLIUM SATIVA : Do not use, without proper care and cau-
tion in tuberculosis as it may cause haemoptysis and arterial hyper-
tension in certain patients.

ADRENALIN : 200 to 10M gives me great results in what
other doctors pronounce high blood pressure its results.
(Dr. W.A. Yingling)

INFLAMMATION

(Cystitis, Glossitis, Synovitis, Lymphadenitis, meningitis and
Tonsillitis)

ACONITE : Do not alternate Aconite and Ipecac. Aconite is
of no use when exudation begins.
(Dewey)

The woman is a natural Aconite patient, with her sympathetic
natural sensitiveness. It is very seldom that fear will give a man
inflammation, but fear is a common cause of inflammation of the
uterus and of the ovaries in plethoric, vigorous, excitable women.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

An inflammation that is about to run a prolonged course, to
take on suppuration, or if it is mucous membrane to take on dis-
charge of pus, will never show you symptoms of Aconite.

i : (Dr. J.T. Kent)

“07


--- Page 113 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

“Aconite is the first and main remedy in minute doses in in-
flammation of the wind pipe (croup, membraneous, larynigitis), in
‘various kinds of inflammations of the throat and fauces as also in
the local acute inflammations of all other parts, particularly where,
in addition to the thirst and quick pulse, there are present anxious,

- impatience and inappeasable mental agitation and agonising toss-

ing about------- ;
(Dr. Hahnemann)

APIS MEL. : There is scarcely a remedy that has much such
marked symptoms of glossitis as Apis.
(British Journal of Homoeopathy)

It acts on the synovial membrane, giving a perfect picture of
synovitis, particularly when it affects the knees.
(Dr. F.A. Farrington)

ARNICA : Is very beneficial not only in injuries caused by
severe contusions and lacerations of fibres, but also in the most
severe wounds by bullets and blunt weapons. In the pains and other
ailments consequent upon extracting the teeth and other surgical
operation where by sensitive parts have been violently stretched as
also after dislocation of joints after setting fracture of bones etc.

It can bring out a very nasty dermatitis when used externally
too long and too strong even a cellulitis when applied to wounds
where the skin is broken and here it is better always to use Hyperi-
cum.

(Dr. M. L. Tyler)

BELLADONNA : Is one of the leading remedies in all acute,
febrile and inflammatory disorders as well as spasms. The very
wide field of indication is partly attributed to the nerves, action of
therapeutic doses and high dilutions. It has often been established
that lower doses paralyse the autonomic nervous systems where as
the latter is excited by minimum doses. If you want to be successful

108


--- Page 114 ---
’ DISEASES

with Belladonna treatment the great care in regard to the dose i is,
therefore, necessary
(Indo German Homoeopathic: Review No. 12; 1937)

BRYONIA : The characteristic pain of inflammatory affec-
tions of the serous membranes are strtching pains, this is the reason
why Bryonia comes to be such a renal remedy in pleuritis, meningi-
_ tis, peritonitis, pericarditis etc. The subjective symptoms correspond-
ing to the remedy must go down before it and the objectives must as
surely follow.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

CAUSTICUM : This is like Nux-v. and Canth. I once cured a
chronic case of cystitis in a married woman which had baffled the
best efforts of several old school physicians, eminent for their skill,
for years. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

CHAMOMILLA : This is a remedy for inflammation of the
tonsils where the ear is involved and is ameliorated by heat, that
very few use but it is of great value, it is Chamomilla and it is
especially indicated if the patient is irritable.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

IODUM $: It is said to be advisable in treating tuberculosis -
Lymphadenitis. (Dr. J.T. Kent)

MERCURIUS : I remember a case of this type. It was called
‘ cerebro-spinal meningitis, the head was drawn back and twisted
“and held to one side. It began as an otitis media with discharge
which was suppressed. Two or three doctors were called and could
-do nothing. In the night I went to bed side and got the history and
‘symptom of Mercurius. Merc. re-established the discharge in
- 24hours. The torticollis subsided and the child made an excellent
_ recovery. I can recall many such cases.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

109


--- Page 115 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

INJURY AND WOUNDS.
‘(Dog bite, Bee sting, Fracture, Post-operative effects, laceration)

ARNICA : it should never be: applied hot or at all when abra-
sions or cuts are present.
(Boericke)

“It should not be used externally or internally i in the bites of mad
dogs. or other rabid or angry animals.

Amica tincture applied neat to a wasp or bee sting is wonder-
fully affective. os .

Given immediately in fracture and dislocations, relieves the

~ nervousness and pains like magic, both internally and externally.

(Dr. R. Patel) —
(Dr. Ehas) .

If given at once after a fracture, it almost instantly relieves the #'
muscular spasm which often occur and also relieves the shock.
(Dr. Stearns)

It will quite the startings of fractured limbs.
(Dr. Hughes)

[have seen sprained ankle when it was black and blue, so swol-
len that the shoe could not be put on, but after a dose of Arnica, the
swelling disappeared in an astonishing way, the discoloration faded
out and the patient was able to stand on the foot.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

It is very beneficial not only in juries caused by severe contu-

sions and lacerations of fibres, but also in the most severe wounds
by bullets and blunt weapons; in the pains and other ailments conse-

110


--- Page 116 ---
DISEASES

quent on extracting the tecth and other surgical operations by sensi-
tive parts have been violently stretched; as alsoafter dislocation of
joints, after setting fracture of bones etc.

(Dr. Hahnemann)

I once cured a man who had suffered from what he and his
physician had called dyspepsia for several years. He had been obliged
to.give up his business because he could not eat enough to support
his strength. He had been told by his physician that he would never
be well again and had given up hopes himself. This condition was
caused by the kick of horse upon the region of the stomach. A few
doses of Arnica200 cured him in a short time and he resumed his
business. (Dr. E.B. Nash)

Arnica should be administered when ever there is muscular fa-
tigue from whatever cause. Its power to aid the restoration of cx-
hausted muscles is truly wonderful.

(Dr. Ruddock)

BRYONIA : is often indicated in injuries of joints where Ar-
nica would be a failure.

CAUSTICUM : In 6th dilution will give immediate relief to
pain in case of bums and scalds. (Dr. R.B. Das)

For contracture of the muscles after a fracture.
(George Vitholkas)

CALENDULA : Raw surfaces and wounds : always protect
surface that are exposed and raw and bleeding with something of a
bland and superficial character. Wounds must be dressed with as
simple a méans as possible and there is no simpler dressing than
Calendula, one part to 4 or 6th of water.

External Application : The conditions that come from the exter-
nal ought to be remedied to a great extent by external means. A
solution of “Calendula” is excellent in conditions that come from

lil


--- Page 117 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

the external and it should be applied externally when you have lac-
erated wounds and cuts with knife or other sharp instruments.

Injury From Instrument : Apply “Calendula” because the in-
jury is external without internal effect.

HYPERICUM : Belongs to lacerated wounds, and when there
is laceration of parts that are full of small nerves, sentient nerves,
give it at once. Do not waste time with Arnica because there is
soreness, for the soreness is of much less importance than the dan-
ger from nerves in lacerated wounds. In punctured wounds give
Ledum at once. (Dr. Kent)

Quite supercedes the use of Morphines after operations in my
hand. (Dr. Helmuth)

Nothing equals Hypericum in cases of smashed fingers.
(Farrington)

No home in town or country should be without stinging nettle
tincture. Urtica-Urens. If only because of its magic power over
burns, for almost instant relief of pain and rapid healing. This ap-
plied of course to fairly superficial burns.

(Dr. Tyler)

LEDUM-PAL : Punctured wounds will be prevented against
tentanus if it is at once treated with “Ledum”’.

Scars Tissue Remedies : Drosera, Sil. and Graph.
(Talks On Classical Homoeopathy)

INTESTINAL COMPLAINTS

ANT.-CRUD. : For diarrhoea alternating with constipation in -
old people.

112


--- Page 118 ---
DISEASES

ARSENIC-ALBUM : Do not give arsenic Just because it con-
forms to dysenteric condition, for it does not cure, it will mix up the
case. Hesitate about giving Arsenic in dysentery until you are per-
fectly sure it is indicated.

(Dr. J.T Kent)

Beware of the use of Arsenic in the summer complaints of young
babies for dysentery and cholera infantum. There are many little
symptoms that are common to these complaints and that if one is
not warned he is likely to give his patient Arsenic., thereby sup-
pressing some of the symptoms and changing the aspect of the case
and therafter no other remedy for it, can be found yet the case can-
not be cured by Arsenic. There is a strong tendency to give Arsenic
without a sufficient number of generals being present, if you give it
on particulars and not on the generals of the case.

(Dr. J.T Kent)

There is a reason to fear that, as routine is easier than study,
Arsenic may have accomplished more harm than good in the hands
of homocopathic practitioners. No remedy has been more frequently
~ given in acute affections of the bowels, while it is not the most
frequently indicated, and it is not the remedy to be unwisely used.
The symptoms which more clearly distinguish it from other rem-
edies with a similar totality are characteristic thirst and restless-
ness. These two must be present as a general rule.

(James B. Bell)

CHAMOMILLA : Novice often fails with Chamomilla. It is
not adapted to every case of diarrhoea during dentition. The mental
symptoms are of chief importance (compare China), but the desire
to be carried about is not alone decisive. If however, the other symp-
toms correspond particularly of the stool, this symptom will make
the choice more certain. Chamomilla is not often indicated in cases
of long continuance and is often unable to complete the cure done,
requiring to be followed by Mere. Sol or Sulphur.

113


--- Page 119 ---
. BEFORE PRESCRIBING

~ FERR.PHOS. : Is néyer useful when tenesmus is present in
dysentary. oe (Boericke & Dewey)

LACHESIS : Is not often required in the treatment of diar-
rhoea. In chronic cases or when occuring in progress of other acute
diseases, it may become indicated by the concomitant symptoms.

(James B.Bell)

NATRUM MUR : Effects a radical cure of constipation when
many boasted and popular remedies fail. Itis a regulator of water in
the system and if moisture is drawn from recturn, ‘oss of function
results and produces constipation

~ (Dr. Heselton) -

NAT-SULPH. : Nat-sulph., Sang., Puls., Lyc..cure alternation -
of diarrhoea and constipation. _ (Dr. J.T.Kent)

In chronic diarrhoea there is almost always some trouble with
the liver, evidenced by soreness in the nght hypochondrium which
is sensitive to touch and hurts on walking or any jar.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

One point in the digestive upset of Nat-Suiph. is that whether it
is gall bladder or liver upset or whether it is an appendix, concur-.
rently with the attack, the patients are liable to get a suppurative
condition about the seat of the nails. I have verified it several times.
A patient with chronic liver who whenever he is getting a slight
increase of disturbance, begins to develop suppurating place around
his nails, will very often unto Nat-Sulph.

Or DN. Borland)

RHUS- TOX - The gastric symptoms of Rhus-tox are impor-
tant. Here do not give the remedy too low. The symptoms present
should be (1) Want of appetite with unquenchable thirst. (2) Bitter
or metaltic taste. (3) Sleepiness. (4) Nausea and inclination to vomit
after eating or drinking. (5) Bloated abdomen after eating.

(Dewey) |

114


--- Page 120 ---
DISEASES

INSANITY

BELLADONNA | Itis a frequent. mistake to give too low, the
higher potencies act better and more frequently.
(Dewey)
CALCAREA-CARB : When an individual ceases to love his
own life, and is weary of it, and loathes it, and wants to dic, he is on
the borderline of insanity. In fact that is insanity of the will, you
have only to look with an observing eve to'sce that, one may be
insane in the affections, ar msane in the intelligence. One may re-
main quite intact, and the other one be destroyed.
(Dr. JT Kent)

It is a strange thing to sec a bright little girl $ to © years ald
taking on sadness, melancholy and commencing to talk about the
future world and the angel and that she wants to dic and go there
and she is sad and wants to read the Bible all day This is a strange
thing and yet Calcarea has cured that

(Dr. J.T Kent)

CAPSICUM : Animpulse is sometimes overwhelming and over
balances the mind and he commits suicide. Some persons lic awake
at night and long for death and there is no reason for it. That is the
state of the will, impulse to come into the thoughts, If he desires to
have a knife to commit suicide, that is altogether different from
impulse to commit suicide.

PLUMBUM.: She would be in a hysterical condition for hours
when anyoné was looking at her. When she thought no one was
near, she would get up, walk about, look in the mirror to see how
handsome she was, but when she heard a foot on the steps she would
lic on the bed and appear to be unconscious, She bear much prick-
ing and you could scarcely tell she was breathing.

(Dr. J.T Kent)

115


--- Page 121 ---
_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Insanity is curable if there die no ‘incurable results of disease.
It is true that phthisis and insanity are convertable conditions,
the one falls into the other. Many cases that are treated and cured
and pthisis of the lungs has just been turned aside finally become
insane, Persons who have been cured of insanity go into pthisis and
die, showing the deep seated character of their nature. The mtellec-
tual symptoms and lung symptoms are interchangeable.

LUNGS

ACONITE : In congestions of lungs, Aconife is the main rem-
edy. (Dr. Bohr)

In simple acute pleurisy, Aconite i is the sufficient remedy.

In the first stage to be followed by Merc. later are often the only
two medicines needed in:acute catarrhal:bronchitis.
v (Dr. Hering)

““Aconite produces a very rapid inflammation of the viscera of
the chest, of the pleura, of the Jungs, of the mucous membranes _
lining the air passages”.

“In these chest troubles there is much pain, shooting, burning,
tearing pains and the patient is compelled to lie in a somewhat el-
~ evated position, on the back, cannot lic upon either. side, ‘but upon
the back. Lying on the side increases the pain”.

“ Or. J T.Kent)

APIS - Apis and Sulphur will cure majority of cases of pleu- |
risy. Bryonia is almost a specific for pleuro-pneumonia.

’ ARNICA : In inflammation of the kidneys and bladder, of the
liver and even in pneumonia, the mental state and sore bruised feel-
ing all over the body would enable you to do astonishing work in
such cases.even though Amica has never produced pneumonia.

(Dr, J.T. Kent)

116


--- Page 122 ---
DISEASES

ARSENIC . If however, there is a case of double pneumonia
and case is advancing towards a fatal issu, it may be that all at
once. 1,2, or 3 o'clock in the morning he begins to sink. bis nose
becomes pinched, his lips are drawn, he takes on a hippocratic coun-
tenance, is covered with cold sweat, he is too feeble m every part of
his body to move, he only moves his head a little in.a-restiess man-
ner. Unless you give him a dose of Arsenicum he will dic, but make
this in 24hours, he will die unless you follow the Arsenic with proper
reniedy. There are times, you will sce “Phos.” is the remedy.

(Dr JT Kent)

In pneumonia, in hepatization period, when the symptoms point
towards Ars., the patient will die if Ars is prescribed, for this
medicine is not deep enough to include the infiltration. Sulphur, Lyeo.,
Phas,. Cate-c. ee: rust take up the work where Ars, could not
proceed. One of these remedies will clear out the lungs; in-a few
hours, with a disappearance.of all the symptoms. dependent upon
the infilteration, and the patient, freed of the burden, will be re-
stored to health promptly, instead of succumbing to the mechanical
interference and consequent air starvation.

(Dr JT Kent)

{t ts particularly efficacious in many affections of lungs where
the breathing is very much oppressed. Respiration is wheezing, with
cough and frothy expectoration. patient cannot lie down, must sit
up to breatie and is unable to move without being greatly put out of
breath The air passages seem constricted. It is especially useful in
asthmatic affections caused or aggravated by suppressed eruption,
like pneumonia from retrocedent measles or even chronic lung
troubles from suppressed eczema. (Dr. EB. Nash)

Dr. Kent states in his lecture on Arsenic in pneumonia that Ar-
senic. winte it ameliorates the condition, rarely cures unless-a dose
of Phos. or Sulphur follows. He says “those desperate cases that
Ars. brings up and warms up for little while will need Phosphorus."

7



--- Page 123 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

BRYONIA : In peritonitis we-use Bry, when we desire to re-
move the effused fluid as soon as Possible.

-FERR-PHOS :- Marked plewrisy contra-indicates Ferr p.m
pneumonic fever.

~ LYCOPODIUM - Has often saved neglected, mal-treated im-
perfectly cured cases of pneumonia from running into consump-
tion. It may even come into the later stages of acute attack itself, &
here as usual the disease is apt to be in the mght lung and especially
if liver complications arise: The disease has passed the first or
congestive stage and generally the stage of hepatization, or is in the
last part of this stage and is trying hard to take a favourable tum _
into the breaking up of third stage, the stage of resolution. Just here
is where many cases die, neither free expectoration nor perfect ab- -
sorption of the disease product taking place. There is extreme dysp-
noea. the cough sounds as if the entire parenchyma of the lung were
softened; even raising whole ,mouthfulls of mucous does not afford
relief, the breath is short and the wings of the nose expand to their -
utmost with fan like motion. Now is the time when Lycopodium —.
does wonders again, even when this stage is imperfectly passed and
the patient still coughs and expectorates much thick, yellow, puru-
lent or greyish yellow, purulent (sometimes foetid) matter, tasting
salty, with much rattling in the chest, Lyco. is indispensable. It has _
often saved neglected, mal-treated or imperfectly cured cases of
pneumonia from minning into consumption.

Or E.B. Nash)

-B. Morgon high, when Phos., Lyco., Ant-t., Tuber, Sulph., all
fail i in pneumonia’s of infants-children.
(Or WB. Griggs)

PHOS. : IF yc you ut pive Phos: in pneumonia when it is indicated
and prescribed 4 or 5 drops of the first to the third potency every
hours it will rarely take more than two hours before the piercing
pains ccase completely and lastingly. The fever subsides at the same

118


--- Page 124 ---
DISBASES

time but difficulty of breathing remains and we count ourselves lucky
if we have not brought about other Phos. symptoms as colic, diar-
rhoea and the like. The main disagreeable consequence however lies
in the fact that the absorption of the dischange (exudation) will ci-
ther proceed any further at/all or very slowly go on the other hand,
ifwe apply hos, at 30th or higher every hour or with larger inter-

vals. the piercing pains will not be removed so sean instantly. The
fever would only subside for sometime but the absorption of the
exudation and conscquent relief from dyspnoca will keep step with
i. colic could never happen. (Grauvog))

it is very seldom, that an infant gets a true pneumonia, it is
generally a bronchitis with coarse rattling.

MIND

CALC-CARB. © When an individual ceases to love his own
life'and is weary of it and Toathes it. and wants to die, he 1s on tho
border line of insanity Infact tliat is the insanity of the will, you
have only, to look with 4n observing eye to see that one may be
insane m the mtelligence. One may remain quite intact.and the other
ane be destroyed It is-a strange thing to sve a bright litthe girl 8-9
years old taking on sadness, melancholy and commencing fo talk
about the future world and the angels and that she wants fo die and
go there and she ts sad and wants to read the Bibleall day, This is 2
strange thing and yet Calourea has cured, Any amount of thinking
becomes impassible. for him to come to a conclusion, for he-neyer,
figures it twice alike.

. ’ (Dr: 1T-Kent)

CAPSICUM : Animpulse is sometimes overwhelming and over
balances the mind and he commits suicide Some persons lic awake
at mght and lony for death and there is.no reason for it. That is the

19

_- |


--- Page 125 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

state of the will, insanity of the will, impulses come into the thought.
- ‘If he desires to have a knife to commit suicide, that is altogether
- different from an impulse to commit suicide. .

(Dr. J.T.Kent)

IGNATIA : A sensitive girl, though she would not let anyone

but her mother know of it, falls in love with a married man. She lies

‘awake at night, sobs. She says, “Mother, why cannot I keep that

man out of mind”, ”
(Dr. J.T Kent).
NAT-SULPH : Patient will say “Doctor, you don’t know how

I have to resist biting myself. An impulse to do so comes in my

mind. .

(Dr. J.T.Kent)..

NERVOUS SYSTEM

APIS-MEL : Sensation as if every breath would be his last is —
very characteristic and occurs not only in dropsical condition of the.
chest, but seems also to be a nervous symptoms.

(Dr. E.B. Nash).

CAUSTICUM : On the other hand, has all grades of nervous
twitching, chorea, convulsions and epileptic attacks, even | progres-
sive locomotor ataxia.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

COFFEA : Hering used to recommend Aconite and Coffea in
alternation in painful inflammatory affections where the fever symp-
toms of the former and also the nervous sensibility of the latter were
present and I know of no two remedies that alternate better, though
I never do it, since I learned to closely individualize.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)



--- Page 126 ---
———— z

SS

|

DISEASES

Never alternate medicines like this, they are harmful to the pa-
tient. Individualization is the only method of doing things in a
Homocopathic way. (Dr. 3 B.D. Castro)

FLOURIC-ACID - To prevent the progress of nervous dis-

PHOSPHORIC ACID © It is sin to keep such young peogle
down to-hard study. And while it ts true that youth is the time to get
an education it is also time when too great strain in that direction
may utterly wreck and forever incapacitate a mind which might,
with more time and care have been a blessing to the world.

(Dr EB. Nash)

PREGNANCY, ABORTION AND
DELIVERY

ACONITE - Sometimes a pregnant woman will say “Doctor
there is no use of your planning for my confinement. I know I am
going to dic in that confinement:. A dose of Aconife. and then change
the subject she goes away and in few days, vou ask her about that
fear and she says, “Oh, never mind that.”

(Dr. J.T Kent)
should not be given if there is suppression of lochia.
(Dr. J.T Kent)

ADRENALIN (Supra-Renal Gland) : Sufficient care is to be
taken to employ this in pregnancy. To antidote bad effects of this,

(B.K. Tiwari)

12)


--- Page 127 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

APIS; - Apis produces and will check abortion when the symp-
toms agree, Therefore, it must be given cautiously during pregnancy,
_ because if given in.low potency and frequent doses, it may bring
about a miscarriage, especially before or at the third month,

: “ (Fartington) :

Apis acts unfavorably if given in low potencies for women who
are disposed to miscarriage. It prodiices inflammation-of the uterus
_and ovaries and dreadful sufferings i in external and internal parts.

eT (Dr. J.T. Kent)

ARNICA : I have come to the conclusion that in every case
after delivery, absolutely in every casc, ] have to give a dose of
Amica, I have never had the slightest trouble in many cases because ~
I always have Arnica and in miscarriage after the abortion, always
give Arnica, and there is always something more to come, and it
come out easily and everything: is safe, and absolutely no lesion.

(Dr. F. K. Bellocossy)

BRYONIA : Care must be exercised ¢ as. it may. be injurious -
during pregnancy. ae oe a
“ree. Marrow) .

CAULOPHYLLUM ‘I have given this remedy in. Jong contin- .
ued passive haemorrhage from the uterus after miscarriage when I
had the characteristic weakness and sense of internal trembling
present. be (Dr. E.B. Nash) -

CHAMOMILLA : In the Chamomilla case the patient is ex-’
ceedingly sensitive to pain and exclaims continuously, “Oh, I can-
“not bear the pain:”. Many times have I met this condition in labor
cases, and in majority of them the cross, pcevish, snappish, condi-_
tion of mind accompanying and seen it change in'a short time to a

“mild uncomplaining, patients state, by single dose of Chamomulla .
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

122


--- Page 128 ---
"DISEASES -

CHINA : After profuse bleeding i in delivery, a dos
dilution will recoup the strength of the patient:
oO Or R. B. Das)

GELSEMIUM : Dr George Royal cautions against indiscrimi- .
nate use of this remedy during pregnancy and labour, as causing
tedious labours, use of forceps and lacerations.. — -

oe ae (Dewey)

GRAPHITES : If you know a woman who ts suffering from

-. an old scar that has formed a lump, when she is about to go into
_ confinement, give a dose of Graphites as a general remedy, unless

some other special remedy is called for.
_ Or. J. T. Kent)

_ IPECAC : It is a better remedy than Secale ever was or can be,
for post partum haemorrhages, and it is not necessary to use it in
large and poisonous doses, for it will stop them in the 200th potency
and is quicker in its action than Secale.

bok (Dr. EB. Nash)

- LYCOPODI UM: 200 causes abortion. Ihave verified it many
times. CO , (MLE. Tyler)

NUX- VOMICA : ‘Inefficient labour pains, extending to rec-

~ tum, with desire for stool or frequent urination, are quickly relieved, |

and become efficient, after the administration of a dose of Nux-v
200.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

_ PULSATILLA: ‘Should not tbe given toa a pregnant woman (in
early months). During the 8th month, a small globule of No. 10 size

may be given once in a week to help the pregnant lady to get an easy
_ delivery. It also helps to correct the irregularities of the growth to

one side during pregnancy. The foetus may assume a Proper: posi-
tion.

123



--- Page 129 ---
‘BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Puls. will very ‘often: ‘cause in five minutes a very strong con-
traction of the uterus sometimes almost i in painless way.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

SECALE-COR : Dr. Allen says, “During labour or uterine
haemorrhage it should be used with great discretion. It is extremely
dangerous when there is albuminuria, for it is liable to bring con-
vulsion. If used too frequently during labour.it.is extremely apt to
cause puerperal metritis.

(EF. Allen)

It is well understood that its power to cause violent contrac-
tions of the muscular fibres of the uterus is so great that it should
never be given when the uterus is not fully dilated nor unless there ©

. be satisfactory evidence that no mechanical! obstacle interferes with
the completion of labour, Otherwise there is great danger of death
of the foetus from violent compression or of ‘Tupture of the uterus
from the same course.

(Dunham)

I fully agree with Cowperthwaite. who says, “To give it in par-.
turition to hasten delivery, as 1s the practice of the old school, is
simply inexcusable. “On the other hand, [ agree with Dr.
H.N.Guemesy, “It is useful when labour pains are week, suppressed
or distressing in weak cachectic women, in the 200th dilution:, and
have verified it beyond question.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Weak pains remedied by the indicated homoeopathic drug bring
on natural labor while large doses for the same purpose of an
unindicated one do not and can never produce labor. It is nothing
’ more or less than drug poison. oe (Dr. E.B. Nash)

Labor is painful we kriow, “BuF it! fs comparatively easy when
the women is upon a, suitable rennet.” °

Coffee drinkers often “pamiainy sei “andy ‘You must stop their

124


--- Page 130 ---
DISEASES

Women who have been ‘in habit of taking mercury for bilious-
ness remain sterile. Women needing Sulphur. It will stop the nausea
-and they will go into labor easily with few protracted pains, they
will go through their labor with only the contractions and these com-
‘paratively painless. The only pain in such cases will be those from
‘the pressure of the child’s head.

To restore normal activities of the uterus after the membranes
have ruptured or the ovum passed or when the placenta is about to
‘be expelled give “Sabina”.

_ When Belladonna has been given in abortion, you will often
‘have to follow it with Sulphur. .
co _ (Dr. J.T. Kent)

PROSOPALGIA

“CAUSTICUM : I was once called, in consultation to a case of
' prosopalgia which had for a long time baffled the skill of a very
good homoeopathic practitioner. Not being able to relieve the case,
he had become demoralized, as the pain and suffering were very
‘preat he had resorted to anodynes, but with the usual result of mak-
ing the patient worse, after the anodynes had worn out, then she was
as before. On looking over the case carefully, I found in addition to
the emaciated and greatly debilitated condition of the patient, after
so long suffering, that the pains come in paroxysms that they were
‘ofa drawing nature and that she had suffered from eczema for years,
at different times, before this pain appeared. Sulphur had been
‘given but without relief. So I advised Causticum. It was given, in
the 200th, and a rapid and a permanent cure was the result.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)


--- Page 131 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

_RACHITIS |

“if Cale-Phos fails to. proven rachitis, your may still fall back on
Silicea. . cap hee cysts. _ @arrington)

PSORI NUM: i have stopped the sweating head of rickets with
Psorinum after the failure of Calcium-Silicate. .
_ Or. ‘William B Crags)

SCIATICA —

' ARSENIC : One of the worst cases of sciatica, I ever saw was
cured with Ars-alb, on the indications, worse at midnight especially -
form 1-3 o’clock; burning pains; and the only temporary relief dur-
ing the paroxysms, was from bags of hot, dry salt applied to the
painful part.

. The lady was the sister of Charles Sounder’s of new York, of
school reader fame, who was himself a cripple from allopathically
treated sciatica. She after suffering indescnbable agony for six weeks,
was cured rapidly and permanently with a dose of jenichen’s 8m of |
Ars-alb. So we see again that no remedy and no particular sct of
remedies:can be entirely relied upon, but the indicated one can.

(Dr. E. B. Nash)

RHUS- TOX: will not cure s sciatica when the bowels are coi-
stipated. .
(HC. Marrow)

SKIN
ARSENIC-ALBUM :: In psoriasis the first influence of Ar-
_ genic is to make eruptions redder and more inflamed. This fact if

126


--- Page 132 ---
‘DISEASES . .

_ hot known, will lead to suspension of the remedy just when it com-
menced to do good, at the same time tt: is ‘unnecessary to give. it.in
_. doses sufficiently large to do this.

(Dr Kinger)

- GELSEMIUM : May not have produced erysipclas, it will
stop the progress of the disease in a few hours the patient will go to
a quick recovery, we do not stop to see ifa remedy produces certain
kinds of inflammation ete. but we consider the state of the patient.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

Though Gelsemium may not produce erisypelas it will stop the
progress of the disease in a few hours and the patient will go toa
~ quick recovery.

PSORINUM : is also found useful in the consequences of sup-
pressed eruptions, and in such cases should never be forgotten when
other anti-psorics fail. Dr. W.A. Hawely of Syracuse. N.Y. Once
made a brilliant cure of very bad case of dropsy in an old woman,
being led to prescribe this remedy by the appearance of the skin.
One dose of Fincke’s 42 M potency, dry on the tongue, cured the
whole case in a very short time.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

{have cured eruptions on the skin resembling itch with Psorinum,
rheumatic troubles that were very obstinate under our usual rem-
edies, with medorrhinum and a long standing case or caries of the
spine with Syphilinum but in not one of these cases had the patient,
that I could leave, itch, gonorrhoea or syphilis.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

RHUS-TOX : Rhus is no less valuable in chronic skin troubles
than in acute, Eczemas of the vesicular type are often cured by it,
there is much itching which is not greatly relieved by scratching.

(Dr. EB. 3. Nash)

127


--- Page 133 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

SULPHUR : I gave her‘on account of ‘much burning of the
feet, a dose of Sulphur C.M. in two or three weeks an eruption was
developed all over the body which exuded gelatinous, sticky fluid.
One dose of Graphites C.M. dry on the tongue cured this as well as
the eczema of the legs and left her skin as smooth as that of a child.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Sulphur curcs erysipelatous inflammation of the face, but not

‘so suitable in the doses that come on with rapidity and great vio-

lence, with vesicles and enormous blebs, but it suits those cases ‘in

which at first there 1s the appearance of a mottled dusky red spot on
the face and little distance from it another spot and then another.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

No one need to tell me ‘that there is no relation of skin'‘to internal
troubles. | have seen too much of it and have cured many cases of
that character, where a restoration of the skin diseases relieved the
intemal which had followed its retrocession or suppression. _

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

So strong is this affinity of Sulphur for the skin that-it seéms
bent on pushing everything internal out'on the'surface. .
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Burenett was of the opinion that rmgworms commonly formed
upon those who had inherited pthisis, that it was a common feature
and he used “Bacillinum 200”, He used it somewhat as a routine
remedy on every child with rmgworm. .

SLEEP |
‘Coffea has won to itself great credit asa ‘sleep remedy. In my

experience and observation, it works best herein the 200th potency.
(Br. E.B. Nash)


--- Page 134 ---
DISEASES. _

FERR-PHOS ; Those who. usually sleep well are ‘often ‘kept
awake by Ferr-phosin6x. (Dr. J. C. Burnett)

‘OPIUM : This is the reason why the homocopath cali make his
patient sleep a natural sleep with Opium in the little dose, while the
allopath forces his patient into a stupor (not a sleep) with his big
dose. The one is curative, the other poisonous. .

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Ii sleeping persons may find rest ‘by lying north and south ic.
‘in the magnetic field, with héad to the north.

BELLIS-PERENNIS - Itis a grand friend to commercial trav-

-. ellers and railway spine of moderate severity, it has not any equal so

_ ‘far as my knowledge reaches. I think stasis Hes at the bottom of
| these ailings. - (Dr. Burnett)

CAUSTICUM : Painful stiffness of the back and'sacrum éspe-
cially on rising from a chair.
| (Dr. EB. Nash)

‘SYPHILINUM : There is a cure of caries of the spine of long
standing by Syphilinum (high). [had a very similar case, for which
Thad been prescribing for over a year without success, when I first
-tead the report of this case. In may case, as in his, the patient had
severe pains in the diseased part during the night. Every one ac-
quainted with syphilitic troubles, especially of the bones, knows of
these (terrible sometimes) nightly bone pains. Three doses of Swan’s
Syphilinum CM cured ‘this case in the remarkably short space of 40
days. Boe os (Dr E E.B. Nash)

NECK

BELLADONNA : It is the best: remedy for stiff neck of theu-
matic origin from cold .  4E.A-Farfington)

129



--- Page 135 ---
20D FES Pero sre

Rem

Saxe

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

TEETH

ACONITE : Oh, what a comforting remedy Aconite is for tooth-
ache. It has been so useful in toothache that nearly every old lady
now a-days, knows enough to put a drop of Aconite in a bit of
cotton and put it in the old hollow tooth. It will quite often palliate.

A dose of Aconite will act much better.

Sometimes these pains are in sound teeth and affect the whole
row of teeth. Violent pains from exposure, such as riding in the
wind. The pains are relieved and go away after a dose of Aconite.:

COFFEA : will remove the severest pains, which drive the pa-
tient almost frantic, they cry, tremble, do not know what to do, the
pain is indescribable. It is momentarily relieved by holding cold
water inmouth (Dr. C.G. Raue).

DOLICHOS : In teething affections, if feverish symptoms ex-
ist, always give a dose of Aconite before Dolichos. Where this pre-
caution has been neglected, convulsions have followed the use of
even high potencies.

(F arrington)

A haemorrhagic patient should have a-dose of Millefolium or
Lachesis before extraction of teeth.

Infants have trouble at the time of teething only because they.

are sick and if the child were not in disorder he would not have |

trouble when teething. Teething is a crisis, and the things that are -

within will come out at the time, just as there are troubles that are
' likely to come out at the time, puberty and the climacteric period.

THROAT

‘BELLADONNA: “No remedy has greater affinity for the throat.

- The burning, dryness. (Sabadilla), ‘sense © of constriction (constant.


--- Page 136 ---
« DISEASES: --

desire to swallow to relieve the sense of dryness {Lyssin.}), with or
without swelling of palate and tonsils and is sometimes intense. I
once witnessed a case of poisoning in ‘which these symptoms were
termbly distressing.

. (Dr EB. Nash)

LYCOPODIUM : The swallowing: of warm fluid often causes
choking and after swallow of warm tea is taken, the patient will
clutch at the throat and it seems as if he would suffocate. He says
“Oh, do not give me any more warm drinks”. Something cold will

relieve. (Dr. ].T. Kent)

Now in the sore throat of Lyco. warmth often benefits, but it is
also true in some old cases of Lyco. sore throat, they want cold
drinks-cold feels good to the throat.

MERCURIUS : You should change to Mercurius if pus has
already formed. The tonsil is enlarged and encroaches on
neighbouring parts and the breathing laboured. When pus has thus’
shown itself, mercurius given low and repeatedly, will cause a quick
breaking of abscess, relieving all the symptoms. If you give mercurius «°

at first, you will generally lengthen the course of a case. :

(Farrington)

- TUBERCULOSIS ,

“ACETIC ACID; is one of the dangerous remedies for ‘Pulmo-
nary T. B. It Tf predisposes to haemoptysis.
. a (H.C.Morrow & Dr. J.T. Kent),

_ It has not only: haemorrhage but aiso great debility with chalky
colour of the skin. It suits better after haemorrhage, when the pa-. _
tient has these symptoms and besides has intense thirst.

“ oe (Re G. Miller)



--- Page 137 ---
© YSWO FIeureT:

Hemet

Sot.

BEFORE PRESCRIBING. -

ACONITE : is contra-indicated in fever of patients having:

Pulmonary tuberculosis, because of the liability to contract cold
after its use: :

ARNICA yyou will remove the sore, bruised aching all over:

the body of a consumptive by Arnica and it will suit the cough and
gagging and retching and make him sleep.

Later Pyrogen may be needed for the aching in ' the bones and
. distressing cough.

You patch him up year after year, sometimes Arsenic is the
remedy it has to be more frequently repeated. Sometimes it is Fyco,
Puls, Pyrogen or Arnica,

We can palliate with Tarentula-cub sometimes it has to be re o

peated; it will relieve for days and give an euthanasia,

ARSENIC : In consumption do not give it in the early stages of
the disease. As the tendency of this drug is deathward often Rhus-
tox precedes its use. I will say the same thing im regard to
tuberculsosis. In the last stage of this disease the restless, tossing

_ about is not an Arsenic symptom and. Arsenic will not relieve it.

That is only a precurser of death. .
(Farrington)
‘ With Rumex, Puls, Senega, Arsenic and Nux-vom you can patch
up the last years of a pthisical Patient.
oo @r. IL T.Kent)

CALC. CARB: In oathisis a repetition is almost dangerous, in
such a case if Calcarea is indicated I would recommend a single
dose of the remedy in the 30th potency. You may go higher and

-Tepeat it, if you like, but do not lay blame on me when the case gets

irretrievably spoiled. -

(Bhanja)
DROSERA : Can be used as a pathological remedy for tuber-

cular r glands.

132


--- Page 138 ---
DISEASES

FERR-MET : Avoid in tuberculosis, ‘syphilis and iv persons
predisposed to haemorrhage and especially never repeat it.

We read in the text that Ferrum 1s a remedy for diarrhoea in the
last stages. of consumption. Well, sometimes it is, if the patient ts
prepared to die. Kerrum will stop the diarrhoea, but after it ts stopped
the patient will not live long. The diarrhoea is not usually painful. It
is annoying but it is painless, and night sweats are painless. Do not

‘ suppress them; they had better be let alone. Let patient go on to
_ peaceful termination. The best remedy for diarrhoea in the last stage
_of consumption is Saccharum-lactis in the crude form, given in.

very small quantities and repeated as often as required by the pa-
tient and by the standers.
(Dr. . T. Kent)

- KALE CARB - In pthisis if it were indicated primarily as a
constitutional remedy, it would damage | in the last weeks.
(Dr. J.T.Kent):
- Do not be afraid to give the antipsoric remedies when there is a
history of tuberculosis in the family, but be careful when the patient
is so far advanced with tuberculosis that there are cavities. m the
lung, or latent tubercles, or encysted caseous tubercle. You need not
believe these things, you are not obliged to. But think about them
and someday after practising a while and making numerous mis-

_ takes in attempting to cure incurables you will admit the awful power

of homoeopathic medicines.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

HYDRANGIA : To fatten the patient after tuberculosis.
(Dr. Edward Whitmont).

Phosphorus, Silicea and Lachesis are three dangerous remedies,
if there is pretubercular tendency. The wrong potency or too fre~

quent repetition may drive the patient into an active tuberculosis.

(DrE. W. Thebboard).

133.



--- Page 139 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

PHOSPHORUS : Is a dangerous medicine to give very high in
some cases of pthisis, in the last stage of pthisis. In this case they’
should receive Phos. when they were curabic, In these cases Phos.
30th may sometimes be used with safety and it will act as a test in
doubtful cases to se-whethér reaction can be brought about, in such
cases the administration later of sull higher potency may be found
useful, ee (Dr. J.T. Kent)

One should be very cautious in prescribing this violent remedy, . -

In advanced cases of pthisis it should not be given in very bigh .

potencies. Phas. 30th or 200th is enough i in such cases.
, (Dr. J. TKent) ;

Deeper remedies ought to be avoided if the vital force is low
(i.e. in pthisis), if the body is too much damaged to be repaired.
Hahnemann warned against the use of Phos. in cases of deficient
vitality. Sanguinaria is a surface remedy, it does excellent pallia- .
tion. . . 7 Or. J.T.Kent)

Unless } you give othe drug cautiously, you 1 will precipitate what
ycu would prevent. Be certain that it is the remedy and do not give
it too often or you will hasten the process you are anxious to avoid. ~
YT would not advise you to give Phos. in well inarked tuberculosis
patients: If tubercles have been deposited in the lungs, you should
hesitate before giving it, unless the picture calling f for 1 IS so strong.
that you cannot ot possibly make a mistake. -

" (Farrington)

There is the immense danger of applying Phos. reneatedly in all
dilutions in all tuberculous patient, to such a point that we may, -
without the fear of being mistaken, say that Phos. should never be
applied in pulmonary or laryngeal tuberculosis. On the contrary ~
some combinations of Phos: with other substances will be suitably,
replaced without danger, such as Ferr-Phos, Calc-phos. which are

134


--- Page 140 ---
DISEASES.

classic and give very good results. Phosphorus-iodatum or Phos-
phorus-tri-iodatum are excellent i in some cases of tuberculosis with-
out causing the danger of Phos: — _ (Dr. F Bernoville) _

It should not be given too low or. r too frequently. It. may hasten.

the destructive degeneration of the tubercular masses.
(Boericke)
In the beginning with Phos. in n pthisical cases far advanced, it is

"better not to give higher than the 30th or 200th. Phos. very low will

act as a poison. The only safety. some patients had who have re-
ceived Phos. so very low was due to the fact that Phos. was not
similar enough to either kill or cure. co
me (Dr. J.T.Kent)
In T.B. never give 3x or 6x as these aggravate, Never give It in
full moon to people with lung conditions ce. in the light of the moon.
(L.B.Furd):
In tuberculosis, it is oftenest indicated in the incipient stage
with the symptoms of cough, oppression and general weakness al-
* ready mentioned, but I have often found it indicated in the later
_. Stages and if given very high and in the single dose and not re-
~ peated, have seen it greatly benefit even in incurable cases If given.
. too low and repeated it will fearfully aggravate.
, (Dr. E.B. Nash)

_ Intubercular patients, I would not advise you to give “Phos.” in
~ well marked tuberculosis. If tubercles have been deposited in the
lungs you should hesitate before giving it unless the picture calling
for it is so strong that you cannot possibly make a mistake.

In incurable cases of tuberculosis after the fever has becn re-
duced, Phos. should not be given as it will intensify the fever and do
just what it was given to avoid. It is not uncommon for a crisis to
follow the administration of “Phos.” prolonged sweat and diarrhoea
should never be interfered with as they will soon stop of their own
accord and the patient will be left in a state of quietude. ~


--- Page 141 ---
Gott. CVT +t See TTT

_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING

RUMEX : One word of caution is necessary about diarrhoea
occuring in most cases of pthisis. Such conditions should be left
alone unless they are very marked, If the diarrhoea is very exhaust-
ing simple medicine like Rumex should be used to slack it up. But
the pthisical patient is better off with a little diarrhoea, loose mom-
ing stool. Similar is the case with night sweats, if he does not have

them he well have something more violent. The allopath stops the _

diarrhoea and night sweats, and then feeds morphine to his paticnts
because of consequent sufferings. The more you try to relieve the
outward conditions, the more harm you will do to the patient and if
you go on you will have to abandon your homocopathy and give a

morphine which is really a crime. -
(Dr. J.T.Kent)

In advanced cases of pthisis with carly morning diarrhoea, when
Sulphur is indicated but which will aggravate: if given, this medi-
cine is useful. .

With Rumex, Puls, Seneg., Ars., and Nux-v. > you can patch up .
the last years of a phthisical patient.

SERUM OF MARMORECKX : ft is not dangerous when one —
is careful and applies it in lower dilutions. It is dangerous in high -

‘dilutions because it favours the anaphylactic symptoms. It may be

applied in the fifth or sixth and in these dilutions it is often one best
weapon in tuberculosis with cavity. a ;
(F _ Bernoville)

SILICEA : If there is a deposit of tubercle in the lungs, Silicea
establishes an inflammation and throws it out and if the whole lungs |
be tubercular a general suppurative pneumonia will be the result;
hence the danger of giving such remedics and the danger of repeat-
ing them in advanced stages of pthisis. .
. an (Dr. }.T.Kent)

136


--- Page 142 ---
DISEASES

If prior to the formation of the tubercle, patient suffered from
weekly headaches coming up the back of the head, offensive foot
sweats, sensitiveness to cold etc., and although they may have all
disappeared before the pthisis came on, Silicea will prove a most
dangerous remedy.

(Farrington)

In pthisis it must be used with care, for here it may cause the
absorption of scar tissue, hberate the disease walled into new ac-
tivities.

(J. Weir)

STANNUM : It is frequently indicated in cases where the
routinist would prescribe Bryonia etc, i low potencies to loosen
the cough. Stannum is not dangerous in pthisis and will palliate the
case if it is incurable. It will not rouse up the whole economy like
Silicea, but there may be an aggravation of all the nervous system.
If it brings back his old neuralgic pains and you know he has not a
long time to live and seems to suffer much, Puls. is the natural
antidote. .

In consumption, Stannum is a remedy which you must sclect
with care or it will surely disappoint you. The symptom weakness
must be present, if you expect results.
(Farrington)

SULPHUR : Symptoms are particularly likely to appear when
the physician has reason to fear that tuberculosis is threatening and
even when the disease is unmistakably present the drug will some-
times seem to arrest the progress of it. But in tuberculosis a word of
caution is required. The arrest of pulmonary tubercle require the
effective mobilisation of forces of resistance at reasonably early.
stage. If for any reason this is not achieved naturally or artificially,
the disease often becomes chronic and thereafter smoulders away
with occasional exacerbations that permit, in favourable cases, of
great palliation and of the leading of quite useful lives, but the trouble

137



--- Page 143 ---
= - re wrest

sows:

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

is rarely properly arrested. Sulphur is invaluable in helping to:
mobilise the resistance forces, and in carly or threatening tubercu-
losis will often clear up a case admirably, but sometimes the disease
has a stronger hold of longer duration than physical signs suggest.

Sulphur administered to cases wherein resistance has been attempted
without much success often leads violent reaction, such as used to
be scen after big doses of Tuberculinum and as in some of those
cases, the final result is to weaken the patient and leave the situation
worse, not better. | ~ .. «Charles E. Wheeler)

In structural diseases Sulphur, like Siliceaiga dangerous medi-
cine to administer when there i is a cavity in’ organs that are vital
especially i in the lungs.

SULPHURIC-ACID | has been a very useful remedy in the
first stage of pthisis, with profusc sweat and preat weakness but

~ when given in the last stages it has appeared to bring in haemorrhage

and increase of inflammatcry condition in the lungs.

If the pthisical patient does not have night sweats he will have
something more violent. The allopath stops the diarrhoca and night
sweats and then has to feed morphine to his patient because of the
consequent sufferings. The more you undertake to relieve these out-
ward conditions, the more harm you will de to the patient and if you
£0 on you will have to abandon your homocopathy and give mor- ~
phine, which is really a crime. :

Patients who have a tendency to pthisis are subjected | to ab-
scesses about the region of the rectum that break inside or out and
form complete and incomplete openings. These seem to take the
place of what would otherwise come.and if handled by operation or.
other external means the tendency is to end in chest trouble cither in
the form of a fixed catarrh or tubercular infilterations. Surgeons
heal it up at once and for a time the patient is comfortable but in.a
few years he breaks down. :


--- Page 144 ---
DISEASES

. 4

Do not be afraid to give the antipsoric remedies when in the

. family there is a history of tuberculosis, but careful when the pa--:

tient 1s so far advanced with tuberculosis that there are cavities in
the lung or latent tubercles or encysted caseous tubercles. Your
antipsorics might rouse him into a dangerous condition.

All children and young people who have imherited pthisis may
be immuned from their inheritance and their resiliency (energy) rey.
stored if Tuberculinum Bovinum be given in 10M, 50M, C.M. and
M.M. potencies, two doses of each potency at long intervals.

. 7 (Dr. J.T.Kent)

__. There is no deeper remedy than Silicea in eradicating the tubcr-
cular tendency, when the symptoms agree.

. Tubercular cases are worse, most, from cold weather, and bet-

; ter in cold dry weather.

-- In advanced cases of phthisis with pathological symptoms if
_you prescribe for old symptoms which should have been prescribed
for some years before, you will kill your patient .

Prescribe on the present trouble or some svmptoms only.

“Sulphur” particularly high, is dangerous medicine, yet do not

be afraid to give antipsoric remedies, where there is a history of

phthisis in the family, but be careful when the patient is so far ad-
vanced with tuberculosis that there are cavities in the lungs or latent
— tubercles or encysted caseous tubercles.

Diarrhoea and sweat, prolonged should never be interefered with
as they will soon stop of their own accord and the patient will be left
in a state of guiefude,

Fever has been reduced, in all incurable cases never give “Phos-
Phorus” after Kali-c. would do damage in advanced and last stages
of pthisis. oo a,

Morning diarrhoea that commonly comes with pthisis do not
undertake to stop with “Sulphur.

139



--- Page 145 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING .

ULCER, GANGRENE

- Arsenic and merc.cor. are the two principal medicines for spread-
ing ulceration such as heat in every direction, very offensive.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

* LYCO: In peptic ulcer with pyloric pain, great flatulence leads
us to suggest after Lyco, Uranium-nit.

Lyco. is a great remedy in duodenal ulcer with heart burn, eruc-
tations and pain or pressure in the epigastrium or night hypochon-
drium. It can be used most successfully alternating with the bowel.
nosode in dysentery complaints but be careful of using Lyco. in
potencies much higher than 12 c ina case of severe pain or you may
precipitate a perforation.

(H.W. Boyd}

_ SECALE-COR: All the toes were attacked with dry gangrene.
A few doses of Secale (high) afforded great relief, and checked the
progress of the disease for a long time.

(Dt. E:B. Nash}
Secale improves the circulation of the aged and postpones gan-
grene.

SEPIA : For ulcer; small i.e. about the points of fingers.

ACONITE : For retention of urine in infants.

CAUSTICUM : fi is the routine remedy for retention of urine
after operation. (Dr. D.M. Foubister}

He urinates so easily that he is not sensibic of the stream and
scarcely believes in the dark that he is urinating at all, until he makes
sure by sense of touch.

140


--- Page 146 ---
— DISEASES.

THUJA : For instance, a case of enuresis had resisted many
seemingly indicated remedies until the hands were discovered to be
covered with warts, when | a few drops of Thuja cured.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

WHOOPING COUGH

ACETIC-ACID ; Should not be repeated frequently i in other
diseases except in whooping cough
, ~ (Dr. N.C. Ghosh)

DROSERA - Hahnemann states that a single dose of the 30th
potency is quite sufficient for the cure of epidemic of whooping
cough. The cure takes place with certainty in 7 to 9 days under a
non-medicinal diet. Care should be taken not to give a second dose
for any other medicine) immediately after the first dose, for that
would only prevent the good result, but do serious injury as I know
from experience.

IPECAC : in whooping cough the medicine should not be given
~ after nursing the child as the paroxysms come and he vomits, to be
- given just after the vomiting, just before nursing, it works.

| (Royal)

‘CATALEPSY

CANNABIS-INDICA : It should be remembered if we ever
-eome across a case of catalepsy. In its power of causing catalepsy,

its only. rival i is the chloride of tin.
(Dr. Hughes)

14)


--- Page 147 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING .

ta. CALC-CARB- Iti is a peculiar feature of Calcarea, that the
more marked the congestion of the internal parts, the colder the
surface become. With stomach troubles and chest troubles and bowel
troubles the feet and hands become like ice and covered with sweat
and he lies in bed sometimes with a fever in the rest of his body and
the scalp covered with cold sweat,

— (Dr J. T.Kent)

~-FERR-PHOS : Bell. and Sulphur failed with indicated symp--

tom, Ferrum-phos, did wonders on the basis that congestion be- _
longs to all preparations of Iron. . .
~ (Dr. J.C. Burnette)

“EMACIATION IN CHILDREN : The child takes nourish-
ment enough, whether vomited or retained, goes on emaciating grow- -
ing weaker and weaker until it dies of emaciation unless Silicea
checks the process. Many such cases have I saved with this remedy
and made them healthy children.

MORPHIA
CHAMOMILLA ; vill stop vomiting of Morphia in a a few
minutes. : Fo (Dr. J.T.Kent)
~ LUMBAGO ~

... RHUS-TOX : The specific remedy for Lumbago is Rhus-tox.
So far I have cured about every case that I have had to treat with
Rhus-tox in 3 or 4 days, except perhaps 2 or 3 cases when I had to
complete the cure with Pulsatilla. ;

(Dr. Jahr)

142 |



--- Page 148 ---
DISEASES -: °

~ ARSENIC-ALB : Is the remedy for debility résulting from
over exerting of the muscular tissues such as follows prolonged -
exertion, climbing mountains etc: ~~ ~~ ~~ (Farrington)

OPPOSITE EFFECTS
BELLADONA : Of all drugs it has the power of producing

opposite effects most markedly. (Farrington)

PARALYSIS

CAUSTICUM : Dryness of mouth and throat, rawness of the
throat, must swallow constantly on account of a sensation of full-
ness in the throat, a nervous feeling in the throat. This is often a
forerunner of paralysis. (Dr. J.T. Kent)

SCARLATINA

ARUM TRIPHYLLUM: As soon as child gets better in scar-
latina, there is frequent discharge of pale urine. . Now stop the rem-
ody 0 or any other.

. (H.C. Morrow)

SERUM THERAPY

_ Puls. above all has the power to unlock suppression of modern
serum therapy.
(Dr. J T. Kent)

143


--- Page 149 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

HEPAR-SULPH : It is only very rarely that you will be able
with your medicines to cure a stricture after it has taken on perma-
nency, after it is many years old, but as long as the inflammation
keeps up there is hope. a

i: (Dr. | T.Kent)

SUNSTROKE

GELSEMIUM : Among the remedies for prevention of Sun-.
stroke, Gelsemium is the most important.

(C.G. Raue)

VOMITING

ACONITE : has vomiting of red blood, occuring suddenty with
anxiety and heat on the face, There is sensation of burning and
pressure in the stomach.

TASTE

ACONITE - Everything tastes bitter except water, and On!
how the Aconite patient longs for water. It seems almost impossible
for him to get water enough and it agrees well.

(Dr. |. T.Kent)

PULSATILLA : The bad taste in mouth is persistent and the
loss of taste is frequent, as is also the loss of smell.
(Br. E.B Nash}

~ ‘144


--- Page 150 ---
ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES

I was hesitent to add this chapter in this book for fear that the
physicians might form the habit of alternating one medicine after
another without waiting or giving opportunity for the first one to
act and do all that it could do and then to bring out other set of
symptoms pointing for another remedy which ts its complementary.
Farrington and Kent have clarified this point. After giving a medi-
eine (especially those listed below) wait for the change of symp-
' toms calling for the next remedy which is normally the one which
follows the principle remedy.

Because this knowledge, I found very essential for a prescriber.
I have though hesitatingly added below the alternating medicines
against the given conditions. But this alternation must be done cau-
. tiously and judiciously.
(Dr. J.B.D.Castro.)

Lobelia 6 has been alternated by Croton }2 in skin ailments.
Rhus and Ledum alternately in skin ailments.
Helleborus and Bryonia alternates in meningitis of children.

Hyoscyamus alternates well with Rhus-tox (fever). Hyoscya-
mus is also very useful in scarlatina of the typhoid form, and is
complementary of Rhus-tox, in these cases.

All recent cases of dysentry have yielded quickly to Merc-cor
alternated with Colocynth.

Phytolacca occupies a place midway between Bryonia and Rhus-
fox, and will often help when these seem indicated but fail. -

145


--- Page 151 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING |).

Belladonna and Thuja in spinal meningitis taken alternately
lengthen the interval between doses as symptoms improve.

Belladonna and Bryonia in simple meningitis.

Ipecac and Bryonia alternated in compound angina. When Rhus-
tox fails, Rhododendron may be used. Aconite in the first stages of
catarrhal bronchitis followed by Mercurius later often the only medi-
cines needed.

Those desperate cases that Arsenic brings up and warms for’ a
little while, will need Phosphorus or ‘Sulphur °

NOTE .: Alternation of remedies does not mean that the reni-
edies have to be alternated indiscriminately. But they are to be alter-
nated when the symptoms call for the next remedy.

@r J.B.D Castro)

146


--- Page 152 ---
CAUTIONS
DO'S AND DON'TS

ACONITE: Do not alternate with another remedy.
Do not continue if a few doses do not act.

Do not waste time by giving it in a. case of
typhoid fever.

Do not try to control fever resulting from
morbid poison by it.
Do not give it in fever which is symptomatic
of an acute local inflammation. It will do little
good.

Never give it where sickness is’ borne with
calmness of the patient. , -
(Das Gupta)

Whenever Aconite is chosen homoeopathically,-you must above
all, observe the moral symptoms and be careful that it clearly re-
sembles them; the anguish of mind and body; the restlessness, the
disquict not to be allayed.

(Hahnemann)

., ACONITE-BELLADONNA : I have known tempcrament so
intensely, Aconite or Belladonna that they could not take these rem-
edies except in high and highest potencies and then only im single
doses at long intervals. (Dr. Hale)

The custom of alternating Aconite and Belladonna in inflam-
matory affections which so widely prevails is a senscless one. Both
remedies cannot be indicated at a time and if a good effect follows

147


--- Page 153 ---
_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING

their administration you may be sure that the indicated one cured in
spite of the action‘of the other, which only hindered, or that the.
patient recovered without help from either.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Burning i is symptom that runs all through the remedy 1.e. Aco-
nite. (Dr..J.T.Kent) -

Do not alternate Aconite and ipecac. Aconite i is of no ‘use when :
exudation begins.

Stop the medicine when the skin is moist or when the patient
breaks out in sweat.
(Ghosal)

Aconite must be ; given in all those cases whete the patients are
almost frantic with pain, which Coffee has failed to relieve. ce
| (Dr. C.G. Rane)

ALLIUM-SATIVA : Do not use without proper care and cau
tion in tuberculosis, as it may cause haemoptysis and arterial hy-
potension in certain patients.

(Cautions in homoeopathy by Dr. Y:R. & Aggarawal)

AMBRA-GRISEA : If given too frequently and i in too. large
doses, may produce uterine atony. — _
(HL C. Allen)
ANACARDIUM - It is contraindicated where there is an ex-
cessive coagulation of blood.
. . (Farrington)

APOCYNUM: This remedy must be given carefully. In sensi-
tive patients, the tincture will sometimes produce vomiting and symp-

toms of collapse.
(J.H.Clarke)

148


--- Page 154 ---
CAUTIONS DO'S AND DON'TS

ARNICA : is apt to produce a severe form of erysipelas, when
applied externally. In some instances, it produces erysipelas by its
mere exposure in the room in which susceptible individual sleeps.
Indeed, in consequence of this tendency, the physician should not
prescribe in lotion or the strong tinctures; substituting for it Ruta,
Calendula, Hamamelis or Rhus. It should always be used with cau-
tion and in a sufficiently diluted form.

Should never be applied hot at all when abrasions or cuts are .
present. , (Boericke)

ARSENIC : It makes little difference what the discase is if this
persistent restlessness and especially if great weakness | Is also present,
‘do not forget Arsenic alb.

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

In prescribing Arsenic in neuralgia one must be careful not to «=.
give too low a potency even 6 will often aggravate as the nerves are
apt to be specially irritable. Why should Arsenic be so dangerous -
drug to give? It is the nature of Arsenic to produce and to cure
desperate conditions owing to prevalence of allopathic drugging with
. Arsenic (Flour’s solution, salvarsin etc.). Many pcople are now a
days oversensitive to Arsenic, Arsenic is a violent substance. Ar-
senic ranks with Sulphur, Phosphorus and Lachesis as a remedy
dangerous to repeat or to give tt too high a potency. Where there is
marked pathology except in the most expert hands, one of our mas-
ter says it should never be given in fully developed pneumonia ex-
cept to produce cuthanasia. Kent advises giving it in extremes of —
pneumonia if indicated following Sulphur as soon as the patient
begins to respond with Sulphur. We know that it should be given in
desperate carbuncles or pre-gangrenous infection, ptomaine etc. Do
not be afraid to give it but realise that it is even more of a two edged
' sword than most of our remedies.

(E. Wright)

149


--- Page 155 ---
- BEFORE PRESCRIBING. |

ARSENIC-IOD : Has a marked action on the stomach and
when given low needs to be given after food if unpleasant symp-
toms are to.be avoided.

GAL Clarke)

ARUM-TRIPH : Should not be given low or repeated often as
bad effects often follows..The higher potencies are most st prompt and
. effective.

a c. Allen)

“As soon as the child gets better i in scarlatina there is a frequent
discharge of pale urine. Now stop the remedy or any other.
. _ (H.C, Morrow)

ATROPINE : Atropine sulphate being very poisorious its maxi-
mum usable dose is 1/60 grain. Tincture of 1/10 concentration should

. never be used.

(Cautions i in Homoeopathy by Y.R. ‘Agarawal)

BACILLINUM : The dose is important;. should not be given
below 30th and not repeated frequently. One dose a week is often
sufficient to bring about reaction. It is rapid in action and good:
results ought to be seen; otherwise there 1 is no need of repetition:

~~ (Boericke).

 BARYTA-CARB : It should not be given in catarrhal asthma’
or asthma with emphysema.

(F arrington)

BELLIS-PERENNIS - Do not give it near bed time as sit is apt
to cause sleeplessness.

(Clarke)

' BROMIUM (low) : If preparation is not fresh it will not act’
satisfactorily, while preparing dilution from pure Bromium the phar-
macist is warned to keep his mouth and nose away from the bottle
or else the sharp action of drug creates symptoms at once."

150


--- Page 156 ---
CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON'TS

“BRYONIA : Experience has taught us that the action of Bryo-
“mia in conjunction with Calcarea carb. causes unpleasant compli-
_ cations. Sulphur follows Bryonia but if ulcerated symptoms be
™* present, do not give it as it t would be loss of time.

Sl (Dewey)
-Do not cross Bryonia patient for it makes barn: worse.

Do not take fime j juice while taking Bryonia as it is inimical to
acids orfemons, = . Or J.T. Kent)

“Care must be experienced a as it may bei injurious during preg-
(H.C. Morrow)

-When patients are under constitutional remedies, they need
~ caution about certain kinds of food that are known to disagree with
their constitutional remedy. Bryonia patient 1s often made sick from
eating saurkraut, from vegetables salads, chicken salad etc. so you
need not be surprised after administrating a dose of Bryonia for a
-constitutional state, to have your patient come in and say she has
been made very ill from eating some of these things.
- (Dr. J.T. Kent)

CALADIUM : You can break the habit of smoking so that they
“go to the other extreme and have an aversion to it by “Caladium”.

It has number of times turned the patient entirely away from his
“cigar, and removes the overwhelming craving that | prey ents smok-
“ers breaking of their habit. .

(Dr J.T Kent)

CALC AREA CARB. : Must not be administered at full or
new moon, because those are the days of its aggravation.

Suppose the patient always avoided warm things and wanted

* the cold open air and still hada dozen key notes, you ‘would find
that Calc. would fail every time.

(Dr. 1 T. Kent)

151


--- Page 157 ---
_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING

‘Young children thrive on repeated dose of Calc. (only when
indicated) but with adults, especially old people must bé careful not
to. repeat too often as it 1s likely to do harm.. oa
. {Noel Puddephatt)

~ When you have Calc. which has acted on a chronic condition
that is a kind of relapse of the chronic condition which shows that
the patient needs Bryonia, don’ t give 1 It, Most probably you will
spoil the case.

The calcium metabolism to which this remedy is a good ¢ correc-
tive plays its chief role so long as general growth takes place, espe-
cially bone growth. After this we have to.be cautious in giving the
remedy in high or repeated doses. In grown up and old, this remedy
should be given if compelled by exact similar picture of this rem- -
edy. Even then it should be given in most infrequent doses and i in
moderate potency. .

CALC-FLOUR : Is a chronic remedy: and needs sometime be-
fore manifesting its effects, should not be e repeated too frequently. .
(Boernicke)

CALC- HYPOPHOS - Must be. given low but carefully as it
excites haemorrhage.

— CALC-PHOS : If a child refuses to eat ¢ even after taking + vita-
mins, tonics, appetisers etc. think of Cale- phos.

CAMPHOR : Give Camphor always. ins agar, In water it nau-
seates. On sugar it is delightful to take. ‘And the sugar, also, stimu-
lates and warms. (M.K. Tyler)

Allen says Camphor is not to be givemif therta 18 1S perspiration or
should be stopped as soon as it occurs. cp, Sas
- In collapse, Camphor is the first remedy to be thought of, rand
according to the susceptibility or strength of the patient the dose
must be raised from tincture to the highest potency. ;
“ (E. B. Nash)

152


--- Page 158 ---
Ne

CAUTIONS DO'S AND DON’TS

Camphor is.a medicine-that should be in every: house fof.emer-
gency-use. But keep it in the bathroom. Do not let Camphor.come
near any of your medicines, fort antidotes many of them: - ;

gait

CANNABIS. INDICA: Init insomnia do not-use.it in lower than
the-3rd potency which is a commendable suggestion.
. ; : ‘ (Halbert)

“CAPSICUM - If the patient has good constitutional state. he
will get over the cold on acute remedy, but the old gouty, rheumatic,

flabby patients need a 2 constitutional remedy. ¢
Or I T. Kent)

_ _, CARBO- VEG. : - Except i in cholera Carbo-veg. is rarely indi-
cated in the beginning of any acute disease of the bowels; but in the
later stage it may become the only. remedy capable of producing

favourable changes. _ . : .

It will not often be required in cases that have had good
homocopathic treatment but much more frequently in those coming
from allopathic hands. After it are frequently suitable; Arsenic,
China; Merc-sol, or psorinum. It is only useful for the debility fol-
lowi ‘ng a long fasting attack of diarrhoea.

c ames. B. Bell)

CARCINOSIN: is a remedy which is particularly dangerous
to use without a deep understanding of its effects.

Recent studies of Carcinosin suggest that it may be a useful
remedy when onc or more group of diseases are. strongly. repre-
sented in family history. Carcinoma, Leukemia, Tuberculosis, Dia-

CAULOPHYLLUM : Should not be used lower than the 200th
dilution, like Secale it can be, irifled with. Jt has been often
prescribed for swollen fingers in ptegnancy. (Allen).

153


--- Page 159 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

- —_—. tne nae — ne eg Al

- CAUSTICUM : Dr. Boger says that most of the symptoms of
Causticum are aggravated from drinking coffee; so you should-not
allow your patient to drink coffee while taking Causticum. :

CHRYSAROBINUM | When used externally, it should be used

with caution on account of its absbty to produce inflammation

-€Boericke}
C INCHONA : It should not tbe given on the day the fever is

_expected or just before the attack, otherwise the infinitesimal dose

will cause aggravation to the patient and worn to the attendants

Do not use indiscriminately in every. case of malana unless typi-
cally that of China having al! the three stages distinctly clear e.g.
chill, heat and sweat with all its modalities for thirst.

a (Cautions in Homoeopathy)

COFFEE : As a pain remedy we would not give Coffee in
habitual coffee drinker but Chamomilla rather. -
(Nash)

Coffee must never be used when Chamomilla ¢ OF Nax. is the
remedy. It would be equally true if you are treating 2 nervous para-
lytic with Causticum.

(Dr. 3.T.Kent)

Coffea is ‘not to be given in a habitual coffee drinker,

COLLINSONIA:: Low potencies are. harmful 1 in case of or-
ganic heart disease.
CORPUS-LUTEUM.: should | be used with care. The patient
complains of gastric disturbance, vertigo but this appears shortly.
(B.K. Tewari)

CYCLAMEN CUROPAEUEM : Low potencies may disturb
eye sight. * “, (Caution, i in Homoeopathy}

154


--- Page 160 ---
CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON'TS

SS UIE REA ERIeeREEEEeRiIeeeee ie ee

DIGITALIS - To use it in strong doses for a long time will

render the paticnt incurable. . . _ (Dewey).
-Do not use; stop at once if urinary ‘output suddenly falls.
(Dewey)
--if taken at night may disturb the sleep.
(Dr. Hughes}

~ DROSERA : should be very rarely or never repeated. It is some-
times given only ‘once in the lifetime of the patient in chronic state.
(F. Bernovil le)

‘We are warned against giving this remedy without giving Verat
alb .Sudphur intercurrently.
(Kruchbaumo)

Great care must be exercised not to push the administration too

far. When pulse rate is decreased to approximately normal, or nau-
sea, oppression of chest, diarrhoea or headache occur, it should be
stopped and resumed only when these cffects pass off and the heart’s
action becomes rapid. The dose should be reduced to just sufficient
to keep the pulse at about the normal rate.

(Daniel E.S -Colloman}

Hahnemann states that a single dose of the 30th (the decilltonth)
potency, is quite sufficient for the cure or epidemic of whooping
cough. The cure takes place with certainty in from 7 or 9 days
under non medicinal diet. Care should be taken not to give a second
dose {or any other medicine) immediately’ after the first dose, for
that would not only prevent the good result, but do serious injury as
T know from experience. —

135


--- Page 161 ---
- . BEFORE PRESCRIBING |

ELECTRICITY: shoutd not be used for electrothermal baths
taken when suffering from a cold of the chest be involved; fatal
results have followed. a.

. Be © (H.C.Allen)

FEER-MET. : should never be given in syphilis, it always ag-
gravates the condition. —

_.. Do not-use Ferr, in the syphilitic miasm especially in. the ter-

tiary form. In the comatose formation of the brain, liver and kidney,
spleen and various parts of the body where gumma are likely to
locate in the syphilitic miasm. Ferr-met. might be indicated and has.
appeared to be indicated but it is a dangerous medicine because it»
causes these gummatous formations to suppurate and cause utering, |
haemorrhages. Avoid #errum in pthisis, in tuberculosis, syphilis
and in persons predisposed to haemorrhages and especially never
repeat it. oo,

. x. I T. Kent)

- FERR-PHOS. : : Very irnitable subject must not take it at night, :
as S it is very apt. to keep them awake. _ oO
Baha)

~ Acts brilliantly in the old and Acid- dflour i in the young. I can
vouch from my experience.
Fe Burtt

GLONOINE : There 1S. s risk of Glonoine just previous ta
menses. The periods may failto. appear. .
, . Sore aC. Morrow)

GRAPHITES : Can seldom be repeated with advantage even
after the. use. of intermediate remedies.
(H.C. Morrow)

156


--- Page 162 ---
CAUTIONS DO'S AND DON'TS

HELODERMA-HOR : Do not use it stronger than the 30th
potency. Its provings show that it is near akin to the’ coldness of
death.

HELLEBORUS-NIGER : “When reaction sets in (within two
days) after this remedy which is manifested by sweat, diarrhoea and
vomiting or profuse urination the reaction should not be mterfered
with.-The patient will return to consciousness within a few days. If
Helleborous fails, use Zinc high; the reaction will set in with sweat,
diarrhoea or vomiting, after the tingling’ and screaming.

__ Ihave sometimes observed that the first sign of improvement in
such cases was the decided increase in the urine; and following it a
general subsidence of all the other bad symptoms. I have used it
with most prompt and satisfactory re results in the 100th (B&T) and

33m n(F incke’s) potencies.

: (Dr. EB. Nash)

 HEPAR-SULPH : If our medicines were not powerful enough
to kill fotks, they would not be powerful enough to cure sick folks,
It is well for you to realize that you are dealing with razors when
dealing with high potencies. [ would rather be in a room with a
dozen of negroes slashing with razors than in the hands of an igno-
rant prescriber of high potencies. They are means of tremendous

harm as well as of tremendous good.
(Dr. J.T. Kent)

. Hepar.is never to. be given when the skin is hot and dry; over-
dosing with it is apt to cause Recurrence of more acute sy mproms
and lessens s the secretion of the mucus, rendering the cough dry. .;

(Thousand Remedies)

INDIGO : Should not be given to pregnant women, nor where
there is irritable stomach; nor where there is a history of previous
pelvic inflammation nor where there is marked cerebral anaemia.

(Thousand Remedies)

157


--- Page 163 ---
oe

BEFORE PRESCRIB ING .

a nN

INSULIN : Do not use or to be immediately discontinued if
weakness, fatigue or profuse sweating shows up during the treat-,_
ment.

JODIUM.: Never send an lode pattent to a warm climate.
_ AT. K. Moore)

The local application for x andl clargments is foolish and
dangerous. wo (Dr. E.B Nash)

KALIS : patients who have taken any of the Kali group of
medicines should not have sexual intercourse for a week or so ac-
cording to the potency used and its duration of action.

All the kalis are aggravated after any disturbance 1 in fluid bal-_
ance in the body particularly after coition.

| | (Donald.A Davis) _
KALI-BICH : The lower dilution of this salt should not be ©
kept too long. (Dr. J.T. Kent)

Never give kali-bich in less than 30th potency because abun-
dant experience has convinced that it does better than the low tritu-
ration. ,

(Or. EB. Nash)

OF. course leucorrhoea of both ropy, and jelly like variety come .
under this remedy and many fine cure have resulted from its use.

| (Nash)

KALI-CARB : Never use any salt of potash where there is
fever, and use kalt-c cautiously in old gouty cases, advanced bright’s
disease and tuberculosis. : ,

, _ (TF. Allen)

Kali-carb is a dangerous medicine i in old gouty « cases but Kali-
iod is often beneficial.
(Dr. J “T Kent)

158


--- Page 164 ---
CAUTIONS DO'S AND DON'TS

If you are treating a case of syphilis with gumma in the brain
where it is likely to be present in the later stage of syphilis, Ferrum
might produce apoplexy because of already feeble condition of the
blood vessels. 7 )

(Dr. -T.Kent)

No remedy should ever be given o on one symptom If you are led
toa remedy by a peculiar symptoms.
(Dr. J.T.Kent)

KALE CHLORICUM : On account of ¥ts action upon the kid- ©
ney, kali-chloricum is a dangerous drug in diptheria and cases have
been killed by its unwise administration. {Allen} -

Use locally with caution as it is poisonous.
; (Boericke)

KALI-PHQS : The high and the highest potencies have served
the best and it should be used in a single dose.

Not to give it too often, for it might rupture the uterus.
(Dr. Morgan of Plainficld New Jeresy)

LACHESIS : Care with administration is required in acute —
diseases because administration is almost always followed by an
aggravation. .

(H.C. Morrow)

Improper repetition may graft a permanent unfavourable men-

tal state of the patient.
Is not often required in the treatment of diarrhoea. In chronic
eases, or when occuring in the progress of other acute disease, it

may become indicated by a concomitant symptoms.
(James.B.Bell) -

Its doses ought not to be repeated too frequently. If well indi-
cated a single dose should be allowed to exhaust its action.
(Boericke}

159


--- Page 165 ---
‘BEFORE PRESCRIBING

"In many ‘cases its ‘action of one dase not only lasts for several
days, wecks and months but sometimes one or two doses of Lachesis
have’ cured the: very chronic and the most complicated cases for
ever.

in chronic cases wait patiently and see its deep and intense ac-
tion. I have seen its working of one dose of 30th potency for months
one dose of 30th dilution has cured in my hands not only one case
but patients after patients. In one case dyspnoea with heart palpita-
tion, severe and intolerable pain of left side before menses. Blackish
menses, falling of hairs, oversensitive to light etc. all these symp-
tom were of several years, one dose of 30th potency cured... :
(Dr. B. Parsad Gupta)

;.. Symptoms of the Lachesis have sometimes to be taken years
after.
Bee (Dr FT-Kent)

Crotalus cascavella often completes curative e work of Lachesis.

: Mery often i in more acute symptoms of Lachesis a warm drink
in ‘the stomach is hurtful and causes nausea and suffocation and
increases the choking and palpitation’ and the fulness in the head,
where as in the chronic case of lachesis, those that have been poi-
soned years before there wil] be sensation of nausea and tetidency to
vomit from taking a drink of cold water and then lying down. The
nausea comes on after lying down, that is, let the patient take a
drink of ice cold water and go to bed and nausea will come on. :.,

(Or. J. T. Kent)

a “LYCOPODIUM will throw out a greater amount of eruption:
at first, but this will subside finally. and the child will:retum to
health.

(Dr. J. T.Kent)

Lycopodium has almost, ifn not quite; as marked action upon the.
urinary organs as upon the liver.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

160


--- Page 166 ---
CAUTIONS DO'S AND DON'TS

In‘ some drugs,:200 is a wicked potency particulary with tyco.

a physi ician dreaded to use it.
~ (Dr. M, 1. Tylen

I have been using » Lyco: in 200th potency without causing any:
in n convenient to the patients. I rather prefer 200th potency of Lyca:
a ee (Dr. J.B. Castro)

“Iti is rarely advisable to begin treatment of chronic diseases with
‘Tyco. unless clearly indicated. It is. better to give first another’
antipsoric. -

a c. “Allen)

Nt is deep s seated, | Jong 2 acting and should not be repeated after
improvement begins.

Sulphur acts well if given after Lyco. ‘but not before.
; (H.C. Allen)

This prone to cause aggravation especially when highly ater
ated and hence it-is necessary to give with caution. s
It is one of our best remedies for impotence (Agnus castus). Ani
old man marries his second or third wife, and finds himself not
“equal to the occasion”. It is very embarassing for the whole family.
A dose of Lyco. sets the things all Tight, and makes the doctor a

warm. friend on both sides of the house.
(Dr. E.B. Nash)

Young men from onanism or Y sexual excess become ‘impotent.
The penis becomes small cold and relaxed. The desire is as strong
as ever and perhaps more so, but he cannot perform (selenium,
caladium). I have known apparently hopeless c: cases of this kind cured
by the use of this remedy.

High single doses at intervals of a week or more, Gite it low,

however if you want to, but do not blame me if you do not succeed.’
(Thousand Remedies)

161


--- Page 167 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

MAMMARY GLANDS 6x : Use it with care in pregnancy as
it excites abortion. (Caution mm Homoeopathy}

MERCURIUS : It should not be given often, not oftener than
twice in a winter. Kali-iod is better substitute. Do not give many
loses of merc. In Psoric case: look for deeper medicine.

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

If anyone is skeptical as to the efficiency of the very high poten-
cies, I invite him to a test in just such a case. Give a single dose, dry
upon the tongue or if you must scem to do more, dissolve a powder
in four table spoon full of water and give in half hourly doses. Then |
wait. I have done it many times and I am convinced.

MERCURIUS CYANATUS : Aggtavation is apt to occur from

the use of potencies below 6th. _ (Boericke)
MERC-PROTO-IOD . : Its action ts retarded by care and anxi-
ety. _ {HC.Morrow)

MILLEFOLIUM : Hughes wams us against using Millefolium:
too strong, saying that he has seen drop doses of the tincture seri-
ously aggravating a haemorrhage from the lungs.

NATRUM-MUR. : Should never be repeated in the chronic
cases without an intercurrent, called for the symptom.
(Allen) —

In brandy, a table spoonful evenings, is said to produce concep-
tion, from intercourse the following night. Several Surprising ¢x-
amples of this have been related to me.

(Dr. Hermg)

NUX-VOM. : Unless thoroughly indicated i it should not be pre-
scribed, for while it may cure the piles, it 1s likely to excite some

other trouble, more unbearable than the one it has relieved.
. - (Farrington) -

162


--- Page 168 ---
CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON'TS

-Acts best when given in the evening. According to Hahnemann,
sensitive persons should not take it fasting in the morning or on the
first awakening, because its most powerful symptoms are then called

out. Neither should it be taken, just | before or after a meal or when
__ the mind is on strain.
' {Farrington} —

If the key note (tension) i is absent, Nux-vom. is discarded at
once. , a (F-K. Bellokossy)

It will neither antidote the effects of the drug poison nor cure
the discasc conditicn, unless it is. homocopathicalty indicated, esp.

if given the dynamic form. 2
, (Dr E.B. Nash}

No physician would be justificd m prescribing Mee-vorn. on
- temperament alone, be the indication ever so clear. The whole case
must come mt.

> (Dr. E. B. Nash)

It acts best when given at night, during repose of mind and
body; Sulphur in the morning.
(Dr. E.B. Nash}

It should be given in a higher potency the more exact the
-’Similimum and must be given in the evening, one may add that if
one is not sure, one will achieve more of an organic action with no
' potencies-more of a psvchic with higher onc.

* CARBO-VEG. is an cxcellemt remed in various disease of
the digestive system especially after Nux. has failed.
(Dr. Cawperthwatte}

OPIUM: & alternating states (as an intermittent fever) a mod-
_ erate dose of Opium given during the cold stage quickly deprives a
patient of hfe.

(Hahnemann)

163


--- Page 169 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING :

: Never give Opium with profuse expectoration,; but in.the dry
spasmodic night cough hich prevents steep. a FS any
ne . ry an , _ (Dewey)
* PASSIFLORA INCARNATA : It does not usually act welll in

full blooded or plethoric, but rather in those who ai are- e weak and eii-

feebled
. (Dr. Cowpesthwaite)

“PHOSPHORIC ACID : is never to be used where general
irritability is present and probably many failures are owing to its
misuse in this particular. =. - ot. °°) (Dewey) .

Do not give Phos-acid in advanced cases. when the : stupor is is:
complete and the patient cannot be aroused.

PHOSPHORUS : Is a most powerful anti-psoric but it can be
seldom used with advantage when the genital organs are weak or —
when the sexual desire is depressed or when the vital powers are
weakened and exhausted. (Hahnemann)

Do'not give Phos. in all incurable cases after the fever has been
reduced as it will intensify the fever and will do just the opposite.
Prolong sweat and diarrhoea should not be interfered with, Phos. is
a dangerous medicine to give very. high in some cases of pthisis, in
the-last stage of pthisis. phos. 30 may be used with safety. Phos.
very low will act as.a poison. So ne,
Ss (Deh T. Kent)

-T-can confirm Dr. Rorke’s observation that repetition of Phes.
must be postponed.as long as possible; if it is given too soon it-will
tend to provoke an aggravation. (F. Bodman)

Phosphorus very low, will act as a poison in really Phos. cases
and the only safety some patients have had who have received Phos:
so very low was due to the fact that Phos. was not similar enough te
either kill or cure.

164


--- Page 170 ---
CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON'TS

- PITUITARY,.GLANDS : To,be: applied carefully as it creates
depression. (B.K. Tewari)...

PSORINUM : should not be repeated too often. Psorinum re-
quires something like 1 nine days before it manifests its action and
even a single dose, ‘may elicit other symptoms Jasting for w ecks” .

(Acgedi)

“Although P Psorifum broadly speaking, related t to psoric diathe-
sis, to prescribe that on that ground to combat Psoric manifesta-
tions is a dangerous policy. Unless strictly indicated by the totality
of the symptoms, it must never be given. it is one of those few rem-
edies, which should be used with great caution. a
. (Bhanja)
‘Psorinum patient does not improve ‘while taking coffee.

(Dr. P. Banerjee)

~~ PULSATILLA - Do not pour dowh mother tincture of Pulsa-
tilla by the ten drop dosés, as is the manner of those: who.do. not
believe in potentized remedies. You may give Puls. in the high, higher
and highest potencies and confidently expect the best results. I have
often. seen the delayed menses of young girls-of Puls. temperament
appear promptly and naturally under the M’M. of Swan and-C.M:
of Fincke (also with Kali Ca Tub., and others).
EL as poo ER eee (DERE. Nash)

« SANTONINE*- “Lower preparations are: © often: toxic. Do not
give it to a child with fever or constipation.
: * (Bosricke)
Dr. w. A. Dewey has observed convulsions produced by its use

in too low potencies. a

SEPIA - does not act. below the 30th, ‘The 500th or [000th a are
usually better than the 30th.
(Royal)

165


--- Page 171 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

~ Often cases spoile <d by Homocopaths can be turned into order
by “Sepia. ;

SILICEA: does its best action ina ‘a single dose. There t are Cases.
- that would be greatly injured by deep acting remedy as Silicea, if
given in the beginning, 1.¢., the suffering would be unnecessary, but
if you commence with Puls, , You can mitigate the case prepare it to
receive Silicea, provided the two would appear to be on a plane of
agreement.

If a bullet is encysted in the lungs and the bullet is resting ina
vital case, in a network of arteries it is advisable not to establish.
suppuration in the vital region, by administering Hepar., Silicea, or
Sulphur too often or too high. One should realise that dealing with
high potencies means one is dealing with sharp razor __

(Dr. 3.T.Kent)

SILICEA AND SULPHUR : Are:dangerous medicines where’
there are structural diseases in organs that are vital especially 1 inthe
lung, Se

SUPPURATION | It is checked and the pus 1 is reabsorbed by
“€alc-carb.”, hastened by “Silicea and Sulphur”.

SULPHURIC-ACID : A caution should be observed i in treat~
ing affections with Sulphuric acid, which is not to preserve in it if ©
- the first-few doses fail to mitigate the symptoms for that case; it is
almost certain it aggravates them. —

Or Stille)

SULPHUR : Do not put a Sulphur paticnt into hot air bath or
give him radiant heat and if by any chance he is peppery old Colo-
nel, you will hear about it if you start up his pains with the radiant
heat or his infra red rays. ~ ' (Shephered)

166


--- Page 172 ---
CAUTIONS DO’S AND DON'TS

‘Your former remedy. was-well chosen arid seemed to help the
patient ina measure, but the-case relapses, lingers or progress slowly
to prefect recovery. It is on account of a depression of the vital
force, as Hahnemann would call it. It may be on accoutit of psora or
not. Now give a dose of Sulphur and let it act a. few hours if in an
acute case or a number of days if chronic. Then: you may return to
your former remedy and get results which you could not before the
Sulphur was given. It clears up the case and prevents its becoming

chronic ora {ingering ‘unsatisfactory convalescence.

Never’ use Sulphur i in acute abdomen. Its propensity to creaite
pus and { inctease ‘its development i is well known.
(A. A. Roberts)

~Never use Sulphur in high potency Le. above 30 when there i is
active lesion or eruption, because it might aggravate.
. GC. N. Kanjilal)

In some cof the. cases of brain syphilis, Sulphur. and Causticum
.ave caused. prolonged. suffering and weakness. Here Syphilinum

will act favourably.
, (Dr. JT. Kent)

“Dor not give ‘Sulphur in in a Cancerous case,. as it aggravates. ..
; . {Laura Hurd)

“Do not give “Sulphur if if the tuberculosis has been developed by
pneumonia. To do this is almost like giving a person runing down
hill another push. It will only hasten the end.

DR (Farrington)

" Never give Sulphur in case with a history of syphilis: I have
“seen it suppurates the soft palate away when I did not know that he
had syphilis. You may have to give at once its antidote. Mercurius
or merc-cor to stop the action of Sulphur.

(Dr. LT. Kent)

167


--- Page 173 ---
fA

t=

restore a sort of, order and bring better reaction.

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

- Sulphur. often produces prolonged aggravation where.there aze

many tissue changes in advanced case of syphilis. .

‘SYPHILINUM - When it has been used against the primary
manifestations of the disease and in the earlier phenomena it has

generally resulted. in failure. It is seldom the best remedy for

syphilis per se but for marked and suppressed syphilis it seems to

(Dr. JT. Kent)

Syphilinum i is a ‘nosode which i is “required to be handled care-
fully. In very high grade of “pitta” cases its use can be permitted but
it is always to be used not below than Im. In other cases of “kapha”

and “yayu” even one dose of Syphilinum may prove fatal. Its wrong

use may cven cause meningitis.
-(B. Bhattacharyya)

The potency in pathological prescribing is important, if the
patient's vitality is low, a high potency may make too big demands
on the system and harm rather than good come of it.

(Dr. Grace H._Newwell)

_ Syphilinum is seldom the best remedy for syphilis per sé but for
marked and suppressed syphilis, it seems to restore a sort of order
and bring better reaction.

In some of these cases of brain syphilis “Sulphur and Causticum”
have caused prolonged. suffering weakness, “Syphiinum” will act
favourably.

THUJA : Drives the variola pustules. —

THYROIDINUM : If the crude thyroid is taken two or three

_ grains or more daily the pulse should be watched. Must not be given
in physiological doses where with feeble heart there is high blood
_ pressure and not in tubercular patients. ,

(Boericke)
168


--- Page 174 ---
CAUTIONS DO’S'AND DON'TS

- Use it cautiously in obesity, fora fatty heart may not’ tbe able to
maintain accelerated rhythm,
(Thousand Remedies)

TUBERCULINUM : The first dose of Tuberculinum in any
difficult case is, however, the most weighty prescription. The rem-
edy should not be given without a most careful cardiac examina-
tion, As the surgeon before the anaesthetic, so must physician know
the heart before administering the drug, especially to children and
seniles and to young seniles. He who observes this rule will have
fewer clinical reproaches on his conscious. When Tuberculinum 1 Is
contraindicated, recourse must be had to the nearest anti-psoric.

: : “(N, Montreux)

The similarity of Tuberculinum to Sulphur is so great that any
‘Sulphur case which fails to respond to Sulphur may be tentatively
‘considred a tuberculous case on the strength of its Sulphur
symptoms.

I have wasted much time trying to find a remedy in cases with
tuberculosis in the family. Now [ like very much to augment
Tuberculinum with Syphilmum, When Tuberculinum fails; try
Syphilinum, it often arouses reaction.

To fatten the patient after T.B, Hydrastis.

It is indicated in renal affections, but caution 1s necessary, for,
where skin and intestines do not perform normally even high poten-
cies are dangerous. .
(Nebel Montreux)

In mixed infections strepto-staphylo-pneume, it should not be
used below 500 or 1000 because by using 30, 100 or 200 Dr. Nebel
obtained dangerous aggravation with the falling of the temperature.

169


--- Page 175 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

TUBERCULIN OF KOCH : It is very difficult to-manipu-
ate. ‘Nebel recommends -it. only 1 in: oxygenoid patients who defend
well,

. Bernoville)

JUBERCULIN OF ROSENBACH : Inspite of its reputa-
tion, it 1s a delicate remedy to manipulate. Do not give this to a
person less than 40 years of age. If you apply it before: the age of 40
or 50 you will have to face aggravation. .

- € Bernoville)

VERATRUM ALBUM | is a remedy of great value and one
very often required but like all others it demands careful selection
and is not to be given in every case of cholera morbus or of cholera.
The most characteristic symptoms are the same in both cases, only
more violent | in the later.

The immediate accompaniments of the stool with thirst: and.
cravings distinguishes this remedy. Veratrum is seldom indicated in
painless cases. me a
(J.B. Bell)

170


--- Page 176 ---
We may recall that, while dealing wath “Sulphur” Dr. H.A. Robert
has cautioned us not to give Sulphur in acute abdomen for, its pro-
pensity to create pus and increase its development. There are many
such cautions to keep up while praticing homocopathy. The follow-

ing are a few of them.

CONDITION

During convulsion...

During diarrhoea :
During early colds:

’ During high fever
During acute abdomen

In organic heart.

While starting a treatment
Before bed

In the morning

While treating typhoid generally
In early typhoid

In yellow fever

In advance T.B.

V7T-

MEDICINES CONTRAINDICATED

No medicine should
be given. It will ag-
gravate the condition
especially Cale-p
Merc, Sulphur.
Hepar, Merc, Sil.
Nat-m, Kali-p., Puls.
Sulphur.

‘ Arsenic.
Sil, Lyco.

Ignatia, bellis-p:
Sepia. —
Atro., Bell., Merc-s. |

’ Arsenic

Carbo-veg.
Phos., Sulph:, Sil.


--- Page 177 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

During full moon

Oversensitive patient © Fs

During Paroxysms —

When child is cheerful and digests milk
When the patient iS not unrestful, fearful.

In coryza of women when menses profuse.

In those who never feel appetite.
In those who are always hungry.

In those who can keep standing
Comfortably for.a long time.

In those who can bath in hot water with
pleasure .

In those who enjoy cold water bath.

In those who are running down and
impotent. . _

In syphilis -

When skin cut in injures

Repeating again and again .

When one feels comfortable with
Warm covering _ .

When lady greets with love and smile

Where skin and intestines do not perform

Normally

172.

Spongia, lod., Calc.,
Caust., Sil

Highest Potencies.

(30 or 200 should
only be given.)
Kali-c., Calc., Phos.,
Nat-m. | Eupt pert

; Aethusa.

Acon.

Puls. 7
Iod., Abrot. a
Puls., Ant-c. .

Sulph.

Apis., Lach., Op.

Phos. .
Ferrum. cs
Amica externally. _

Secale. _.

__. Sepia.

Tuberculinum


--- Page 178 ---
CONTRAINDICATIONS

Never prescribe for chronic case, when you are in a hurry; take
time never give a dose of medicine until you have duly considered
the whole case. , .

Never in your life change your remedy when the remedy has
benefited to a patient satisfactorily but repeat that remedy as long
as you can benefit the patient. | Do not it regard t the symptoms that
have come up. ar :

As sure an anodyne i 1S giver, not poultice applied (to an ab-
scess) you will fail with your remedies.

Rubbing is not admissible if it is used to reduce pain. The more
agreeble it is, the worse it is for the patient. In paralysed muscles
rubbing is a beneficial exercise, for them rubbing can take the place
of exercise of the patient himself.

' Save the life of the patient first and do not worry about the
bacteria. They are useless things.

A sycotic is never cured unless a discharge is brought back.

173


--- Page 179 ---
ALTERNATING STATES”

The alternating states. are. considered to be psoric in origin. At
times it puzzles the practitioner if he is not aware of such states
existing in sick. Certain alternating states may not be found in rep-
ertory or in the state listed below. Such states we may have to deal, -
with our own effort. One boy of about l2yrs. suffered from severe
- headache which he developed after taking some allopathic medi-
_ eine. I prescribed the indicated remedy, he developed spasmodic
' constriction in the throat and when a suitable medicine was given
. for constriction in throat, he developed asthmatic attack. it took me

some time to cure him. But it was very interesting and puzzling to
see one state alternating with another and finding a remedy for them..
. The following are a few examples of the alternating states :~

APPETITE, good and bad _ Fert, Phos., Thuja.
ASTHMA and eruptions _ Crot.t., Calad., -Rhus.t:
~ BROODING and screaming Merat.a.

CANINE hunger and loss of appetite. Cina., Ferr.°

_CHEERFULNESS and melancholy Acon., Carb.-an:, Coff.,
oe ~ Croc., [gn., Nux.-m,.

*Plat., Stram.
~ and momentarily quiet
or gloominess — _ Asar.
and peevishness  ~ Aur.
and rage Croc.
CHILL and heat Ars., Chin.-a., Cycl.,.

-Mere., Sel.,Verat-a.
(Now here, now there on:
single parts)

175


--- Page 180 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

COLD, hands and hot feet
Feet and hot hands
Soles and burning soles . .

CONGESTION of head and
congestion of heart

CORYZA, dry and feng

COUGH, and eruptions”
Dry hacking and copious »
expectoration -
DANCING and singing, and
melancholy
_, and rage
DELIRIUM, and colic
and somnolence
and stupor
DEPRESSION, and exaltation
and excitability or irritability

‘DIARRHOEA, and chest symptoms,

and constipation

— andeczema

176

Aloes.
Aloes.

— Sulph.

Glon. |

- Nat-ars., Phos. (Stopped
Up. condition).

“Crot.-t.

Plb.
Stram.

Acet-ac., Hyos. .

Lach.

: _Ph-ac. co
«‘Abrot.ant-c., arg-n., arse ©

i.Bry..Chel.,Coll.,kali-c.,
kali-s., mancin., Nat-a.,
Nat.-p. (constipation one

day, diarrhoea next day)

Nat-s.,nit-ac.,nux-
y..phos., (in old people)

_ podo, ptel., puls., sand.,

sep., sulph., tub., ver-a.
crot-t.



--- Page 181 ---
ALTERNATING STATES

DIARRHOEA (in summer), and
eczema (in winter).
and headache (in winter}

DIARRHOEA, and headache
and dropsy or profuse urination »
and rheumatism

DIARRHOEA and dysentry (in hot
weather) and chest troubles
(in winter)

ECZEMA and internal ailments .

FISTULA IN ANO, and chest
symptoms

FLEXION and Extension

GASTRIC symptoms (in spring)
and rheumatism (in fall)

GLOWING red face and pale face

_ GOUT, and haemorrhage _
and vomiting /

HEADACHE, and cough
and copious expectoration
and eruptions in winter
and foot sweat
and gastralgia
and gout
and hepatic disturbance
and irritability of bladder
and Jumbage -
and pain in joints
and red sand in urine

177

petr

~ podo.

-aloe., pado.
~ apoc. .
due, kali-bi.

kali-bi.
graph.
berb., calc-p., sil.

cup., tab.

kali-bi.
cina.

sabina.
ant-c.

psor.

- Tunix,

psor..
mere., sil.
arg.n., bism. -

~~ byco.

podo..
alumen.
aloe.
eup-perf:
lyco. ~



--- Page 182 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

HUNGER and loss of appetite
IRRITABILITY and laughter
ETCHING and buming of skin
JOYOUS feeling, and irritability
LAUGHING and weeping

MENTAL, and physical'symptoms :
and uterine symptoms
and heart symptoms .

NERVOUSNESS and excitability.

PAIN in the eye and pain in abdomen _

PAIN (sciatica) and numbness:

PALPITATION, and piles
and suppressed menses
and loss of voice

PROFUSE urine
and physical symptoms

PULSE slow and quick

RAVING and stupor — |

RHEUMATISM, and dysentry
and heamorrhoids
and heart symptoms. .

and haemoptysis...

178.

ars:jlye.
lod
‘sanic,

/aPS.

© @arb-s., coff, ign., nat-m-
= nax+m., plat.,- puls.,

saric., stra.

act. likt., plate”
lilt.

calad.

_euphr. a

coll.
OX-ac.

_, benz-ac.

kyos. ,
abrot., kali-bi.
abrot.

abrot.,aur.,benz-ac., led.,
kaln,
led.


--- Page 183 ---
ALTERNATING STATES

RUNS around room howling and
screaming, or sits brooding,

weeping verat-a.
“SCANTY or profuse light urine”
and profuse heavy urine berb., benz-ac.
SCIATICA (in summer), and croupy
cough (in winter) _ staph.
SLEEPLESSNESS and sleep benz-ac.,-crot-h.
~STOOL, hard and soft nux-m.
black and white aur-m-n.
black, green, white
alternate in liver trouble sulph.
STUPOR and dangerous violence absinth.
URTICARIA and croupy attack ars.
VIOLENT mania and disposition
“to silence verat-a
WEAK memory and great flow .
of ideas - cyel.
WEAKNESS and feeling of great 7
strength especially in joints chin.

179


--- Page 184 ---
AT A GLANCE

(I) | SOME GLARING MENTAL SYMPTOMS

Achievement, strives hard for
Ambitious

Apathy-deep

Coward outside home —
Dominating

Frank-Open hearted

Fears financial crisis

Good friend
High-livers-meet misfortune

Life,easy, loves, even declines promotion |

Love, wants only, romantic.
Mental traumatism

Mind, does not reveal his

Mind, unstable

Offended, even by harmless words
Peace loving .

Pallid, lazy
Runs doctor to doctor
~ Sex, early —

Smile, never, on the face

181

~ Nux-v

“Nux-v.

Ph.ac. °
Lyco.*

Dut. Chet:
' Phos.

Aur-met.
Phos. i
Plb.

Ars.

Plat
Tub.

Nux-yv.
Phos., mag-mur.,
nat-m.,puls.

Calc-carb. 7
Alum., ars.,tub. ;
Staph. _

Nitric-acid, Sepia ,


--- Page 185 ---
faRF

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Unsocial.

Visits prostitutes

(1) PECULIARITIES:

Burning in oesophagus.

Chill, severe.after dinner

Pain, in spine while swallowing -
Ringworms on tongue
Sensation, as if many needles are

piercing her and thereafter an attack

cof asthma

‘Sleep, during: anxious

Stertorous

Sweat, face, while eating
Winking, frequent
‘Catnap

‘Chewing motion
Dreams while awake

' Laughs

Saliva flows

Screams
Sings
Snores

~ Startles

Talks ©

182

Aur-met. {also sui-
cidal tendency), kali-
bi.

Lyco., fl-ac.

_ Sanguinaria.

Spigelia.

Cau sticum,

. Nat-m., sanicula._

Lobelia.

Nux-mos., _ opium.
“Tgnatia., cham. ~~
~ "Staph... spigelia.
i Opium, sulph.
7 Cina, ign.
"Bell. Jach. sil, sulph.
Lyco.
"Meré-sol. Jlach.,

Phos.

~ Apis.
Sulph.
Belt. calc-carb.
“Puls. Jach.


--- Page 186 ---
AT A GLANCE”
Walks "0  ~ . . Phos., puls. —
Weep _ Conium.
(Il) SYMPTOMS OUTOF PROPORTION

Bleeds easily ae - Phos.

Fearful, in common ailments, even Aconite.

Legs, unusually weak

Mind, very nervous

a Abrotanum. -
©" Acid phos. ,

Nausea-continued ,, . Ipecac.
Neck, unusually weak . 7 . Nat-m.,lyco.
Pain, very semsitiveto, 9 Cham.
Pulse, fast, abnormally . - Pyrogen.
Throat. highly sensitive ‘Lach.
Weak, fecls extremely — AIS.

Worse, feels, than usually felt in an ailment Lach.
‘Worse, looks, than the condition ~ Baptisia.

"Wrinkles due to some disease Sars., arg-n., stram.;
, lyco., nat-m.

(IV) THIRST

During Chill “Ton, Cap.
In coryza De ~~" Cepa.; ars., acon.;
. Els. oo, .. |. merc-sol, 7
Indiabetes :  Uran-nit.,  lyco.,
eS —.  * mereesol., matem. 7
In diarrhoea ae _. Nat-m., verat-a., ars:

In dropsy oaks Apocynum., acet-.
. acid., ars., lyco..

183°


--- Page 187 ---
In fever

Frequent

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Full of in stomach Symptoms

Hot drinks:
Large quantities, for

(V) THIRSTLESSNESS

Chill, during
Coryza,in »

Diarrhoea, in

. Fever, in

- Fever and dropsy, in
For many days

Heat of fever, during

Pregnancy, during

Stomach troubles, except in

(VI) RARE SYMPTOMS

Back pains ame’. after urine

Body hot without rise in temp.

Child cries, cough, before —

Chilis in-het room -
_ Coceyx, itches

Complairits same hour

484

Eupat-p., acon , bry.,
nat-m., ant-crud.
Ars. oo

Bet

Bry.. Sulph.. Nat-m m.
verat-a., Ign, Mere-

eo SOL

Ars., Spong.

“Cale-c.

Camph., ip. Podo.,

~ Puls.

°+Ferr., Gels.
Apis. .

-..Calad.

Bell.

Lyc.

Acid-fi.

Bell., Arn.
Puls.
Bov.

_ ign., Cedron.


--- Page 188 ---
"ATA GLANCE -

Complaints only in winter
Constipation during Menses
Cough, on taking cold water

Cough. relieved by taking cold water

Cries, on slight cause
Diarrhoea, menses, during —
Drowsy in day, wakes at night
Fears pins

Fever, agg. at night

Fever never at night

Flatus-frequent from vagina

Heart burning
Impulse to wash hands frequently
Lice in hair”

Loud eructations

Men indifferent to family -- +
Milk in the breast of non-pregnant
-Milk runs out from breast

‘Non inflammatory ailments
Piles relicved while walking
Sweats i in cold place

Sweats in open place

Sweats while sitting idle

Sweats with pain

Tears with cough

Tecth bite cheek

185

Sil.

“-Carbo-v.

Caust., Cupr.

- _Nat-m., Caust.
~ Amm- -c., Bov., Verat
— Sulph.. -

Spig, Sil. :
Bry., Ant-c.

China. |.
-Sars., Lac-c., Brom.,

Lyc., nux-m.,

. Puls.

Sypho

. Arg-nit., Carbo-v.,

Chin., Asaf.

Merc-s.

Ign.

Cale-c .

- Caust.
Sepia.

Cham |
°Nat-m,

Ign.


--- Page 189 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Tongue clear in menses Sepia
Urethera itches es Petrasel
Women, indifferent to family . _Fl-ac.

Water brash ~ _ oe  Nux-v,
(VII) COUGH DISTINCTIONS |

~ Burning in chest, with Carbo-v . Ars . Sang.

Chill. cough with ~ -Rhus-t.
. Cough nervous - Ign
‘Cough, night diarrhoea, with ; Sang. .
Cough relieved by cold - ce -Meph., Coce., Cact.
Cough at }ip.m. ‘Rumex,Lach.-
Cough relieved by flatus Carbo-v.. Sang.
~ Mucous flies while coughing Bad, chel
No cough at night . mang. ,Euph.,Arg-
, met., Thu}. ,

(Vill) STRANGE SYMPTOMS

Anaemia. drain without Manganum.
Belching cough with _ , Anac. — |

Breathes better only while standing _ Cann-sat.

Coughs, sleep in Cycl., Cham.,Lach.
Coughs and sneezes _ Agar.,Seneg. .
Hair on tongue, feeling of: nat-m.

Hunger before the attack of fever ) Staph.

Hunger even when stomach is full 7 Staph.

Irritable men, very _ Cham.,Nux-v

186


--- Page 190 ---
ATA GLANCE

Irritable women, Very

Liar

Menses, one day only
Menses, one hour only
Menses only when lying
Menses only when moving |
Nipple feels-as cold as ice:
Nipples, retraction of

Red Objects, look

Sweat usually mil
Ulceration, heels, with shoes
Urine and stool, cough with
Very cruel nature

Very miserly nature

Grat
Op.
Bar-c.
Euph.

‘Kreost.

Lilet.
med.

oO Sars. ,Sil.

Phos.
Nux-m.,Alum.
All-c
mephites
Anac.
Sep.,Lyc.

(IX) LOOKS AND FEELINGS DIFFERENTIATED

Dry cracked lips

Drowsy

Face red.

Fearful

Feels better than it looks
‘Feels weaker than should feel

Hair entangled

Legs thin

Lips cracked at corners

Middle of lip cracked

Looks better than he feels

_ 187

Bry. ,
Aeth., nux-m.,Ant-t.
Bell.,Mill.,Caps.
Acon.

Bapt.

Ars.

Bor.

Abrot..

Ant-c., Cond.
Nat-m.

Lach. -


--- Page 191 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Looks dirty es Sulph. - .

Neck weak - Nat-m.

Pupils still mo _ Op.
Upper lip swollen Bell. Cale-c.
Waxy and oedematous look a - Apis.

Wrinkled a es _. Sars.,iod..Arg-n.
(X) PERSONALITIES a
Constitutionally sick . - Abrotanum. woe
Fearful-strong . Aconite.. «
Lame lady co -, eAesculus..
Children, idiotic . , Aethusa.
Twitches, coughs, sneezes, &itches Agaricus. Do
Catarrhal a Allium-cepa
Sweats at stool-very weak Alumina
Delicate woman ee SN amecarb |
Better meals, after Anacardium
Sick at stomach-tongue coated white Ant-c -
Rattling chest-drowsy-weak Ant-t.
Ocedema-thirstless-hot Apis-mel.
Flatulent-lover of sugar . Arg-nit.

Injured man | ; Amica 7
Dictator, fearful —“Atsenic-alb.
Face, puffed-reversed peristalsis oe Asafoetida
Lost, love of life . Aurum-met.
Face mottled sordes on teeth | Baptisia

Brain circulation, turmoil in Belladonna —

188 .


--- Page 192 ---
AT AGLANCE.

Labour; overworked
Downwards, dreads
Cold, sensitive to, dreadfully
Undisturbed, let me lie
Covers, throws off in cold
Coldness, relieved by cold
Stool-thirst-chill
Flatulent, blood stagnates
Spasms, uterine
Paralysis, of single part or nerve
Spleen, disturbed .
Cannot bear it-turmoil in temper
Liver and chest ©
Drained man or woman
Convulsive ; .
Rheumatism - uterine origin
Child, wormy, —
Cheese, craves :
Weakness-cerebral origin
Wakeful from excitement
Dark urine-gouty, tympary
Piles, cardiac patients of

Terribly severe colic face-distorted’

Feels better when hangs down the’

limbs, sweats on closing the eyes

Convulsive

189

Bellis-p

‘Borax

Bromium —
Bryonia -
Calc-sulph
Camphor
Cantharis

~ Capsicum

Carbo-veg.
Caulophyilum
Causticum, .
Ceanothus
Chamomilla

Chelidonium

~" China |

Cicuta
Cimicifuga.
Cina

. Cistus

Cocculus
Coffea
Colchicum

_Collinsonia
* Colocynth

_ Conium

Cupr-met._


--- Page 193 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Flickering, eyes before
Whooping cough, arthritis, bone caries
Stool or urine when chilled

Stools undigested .

Tiredness, entire body, in
Turmoil, circulation in

Eruptions, glutinuous

Very sensitive, touch and pain, to-
Cough lying down, on

Injury nerves, to

Impulsive and moody,
Hungry-hot blooded
Nausea-constant.

Burning in whole alimentary canal. -

Blindness before headache begins,
ropy saliva.

Acne.

3am worse

Chest rattles- but6t so SO 5 weak as Ant-t,

Terribly otfetisive vaginal discharges.
Never weil since diphtheria.
Sleeps into aggravation.

Chilly-but rheumatic pain relieved
by cold.

Frequent urge to urine, bearing down.

to be alone, flatulent.
Pains relieved by heat.

190

Cyclamen

Drosera

co Dulcamara
_ Ferr-met.

Gelsemmium

Glonoine |

Graphites
Hepar-sulph 7
_ Hyoscyamus -
Hypericum _ - .
. Ignatia . '

Ipecac : - ws

~ Kali-bi.

Kali-br
Kali-c

Kali-sulph | oe : 7
Kreosotum. ©:

“2 Lae-e.
~~ Lachesis.; Suh

» > Ledum . -
_ -Lil-tig.

- Love-only, fears responsibility Fears. =, - ee

_ Lycopodium... =. -

Mag-phos.__-


--- Page 194 ---
AT AGLANCE |.

Sciatica, nipples cold asice.
Foul breath, drenching sweats. : —
Violent pain, violent itch, ©
everything violent.
bad cases of typhoid.
Humanitarian, equalises water
' distribution in the body.
Acid diathesis (produces water
reduces sugar)
Eliminate superfluous water.
~ Painful piles.
Chilly drowsy man-also dry.
A rational critic, frequent and
ineffectual desire for stool.
- No secretion except sweat.
Painful piles.
Ovaries, specially right.
All worse in winter, eruptons in patches.
Nervous breakdown, diarrhoea relieves.
A cloud-freindly attitude.
Vegetable, mercury.
Worse from study.

Very profuse menstruation

Perverted mind.

Boat shaped abdomen. .
Dreads bath. /

~ Very hot breath.

A river (a mild yielding nature)

i9}

Medorrhinum ;
Merc-sol.

Mezerium

Muriatic acid.

- Natemur.

Nat-phos. | -
Nat-sulph —

Nitric acid.
_ Nux-mos.

Nux-v.: -

Opium:

Paeonia
‘Palladium .
-Petroleum: -
“Phos-acid
_ Phosphorus: ~
* Phytolacea ”

Picric acid

Platmum

~ Plumbum

Psorinum
Ptelia
Pulsatilla _


--- Page 195 ---
te

_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING _

Forecast of fever by frequent urine.

Pyrogen
Cannot bear touch or presure. * Rananculus
Sensitive to storm. 7 ° Rhododendron
Limbs fecl stiff, Rhus-tox.
Injuries to periosteum. iE Ruta g. ;

A great chest medicing; relieved

"by flatus. oe _” Sanguinaria ¢, -
All in one. o oe Sanicula oo
A frozen love. — oS Sepia _ .
Cannot sleep for cold fect. -. Silicea
Suppressed insult. ‘Staphysagria
Dreads darkness, dreads water. _ _,Stramontum
Orifices brilliant red; itches. Sulphur
Injury to bones. - » Symphytum -
Friend of Ars. and. Anthracinum. Tarentula c. -

~ Red tongue, red urine.  Terebinth «
Fig warts, Vaccinosis. _ Thuja

_ Desired frequent changes never stable. Tuberculinum
Thick urine. Urtica urens..
Profuse sweat, stools; vomits and pain. Veratrum album
Crampy. Oe Viburnum Op. -

(XI) AILMENTS SINCE REMOTE EVENTS

~ . Since measles

_ Since marriage Medorrhinum, staph.

Since pneumonia Lycopodium, carbo-veg.
Drosera., kali-c., sticta.

) Since burns Causticum.

192


--- Page 196 ---
Since flue

Since delivery.

Pyrogen, Puls.

Since diphtheria _ Gels., Con., Pib., Lach.,
Since head injury Nats!
Since dramage Chin.(1.0m only one dose). .

(XID REMEDIES OF OPPOSITE MODALITIES

Hepar
Iris
Lilt
Ign. .
Lach. ~
Cham.
Bry. *

Med. .

~ Bry.

. puls.
Canth.
Bry.
Rhus-t. -
Brom.
Caust.
Ars.
Secale
Nux-m.
Ars.
Bry.
Graph.

(Rain-better)  Nat-s.
(Water-better) Caps.

"(Cold-Better) _ . Sep.

(Cover Worse) _ Phos.
(Sleep Worse) Lyco.

(Sensitive pam) Op.
--{Headache) ~~ Cocc-ind.
(Day) =  —— Syph.
(Move-worse) — Rhus-t.
(Mild) Nux-v.
_. (Kidney-affected) Rhus-t.
— (Thirst) Puls.
(Chilly) —-- Kali-iod.
(Sea-better) Syph.
(Sweets-dislikes) Lyco.
(Fastidious) _Sulph.
(Hot) Ars.
(Dry) 7 4 Merc-s.

(Likes Hot drinks) Phos.

(Thirst) ip.
(Not-sensitive) . Nit-ac.

193

(Rain-worse)
(Water-worse)
(hot-better)
(Cover-better)

(Sleep better)

(Not sensitive) to pain ~
(Spine-Pain)
(Night)

(Move-better)  °
(Irritable)

(Kidney-not affected)
(No thirst)

(Hot)

(hill-better)
(Sweets-likes),

(Dirty)

(Cold)

Sweats)

(Likes Cold-Drinks}

(No thirst)

(Sensitive).


--- Page 197 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

eT Ue Tar

Cham. (Irritable) Puls (mild)

Staph (Sex-vants) Puls, (Sex doesnot want)

(XII) HOMOEOPATHIC SUBSTITUTE FOR

ALLOPATHIC DRUGS

ALLOPATHIC DRUGS HOMOEOPATHIC DRUGS

Asprin- Bell. Nux-v.

Acid-salicylic Nux-y.

Aureomycin Ars., Sulph.

Chloromycetin Phos., Sulph., Puls., Ars.,
Rhus-t.

Erythromycin Ip., Lyco., Bell., Ars.

New penicillin Sulph., Ars., Rhus-t.,

Streppemycin. Sulph., Rhus-t., Bry.

Procaine penicillin Sulph., Rhus-t, Ars.,
Phos., Apis.

Terramycin Podo, Nat-p , Kali-m

Tertracycline Achromycin Sulph., Carbo-v , Lach

Adrenaline Nux-v. Sulph.

Ephedrine Ars . Kali-p.

Cortisone Acth., Sulph., Carbo-v ,
Lyc.

Dettol Gassia, Sopor, Durba

194



--- Page 198 ---
AT A GLANCE

Morphin Op. - Papaver -
somniferum, Nux.y,
Cham.

Prednisolone Sulph., Carb-vLyc

Vitamin-B Kali-m

VitaminBi2 Cale-phos.

Vitamin-C Cale-p., Carb-y,, 200

Vitamin-D Cale-f Cale-p.

Vitamin-K Geranium-Q, Alfalfa-Q

(Rd. Dental journal)

(XIV) RELATIONSHIP

The proneets of Momocopathy found three prominent useful trios
ina given condition accordmyg to thei indication. Dr. Nash has men-
tuned them as regional trios Le three medicines prominently used
or usciu) m certain region of sickness, c.g: trios of digestion, of
restlessnoss, of pain, of delirium etc. ete

Dr JT. Kent has mentioned these trios for groups of three medi-
cines-in the sequence in which they are wsefil In ail, he has given
TL such tries

Dr. EB. Nash and his Regional Trios

REGION GROUP OF REMEDIES
Miasmns Sulph were. -sol_, thuja.
Psonics Sulph., Calc, lve
Flatulence Carbo-v , china., lye
Sensation of burning Ars., phos., sulph
Restlessness Acon. ars., thus-t

19s


--- Page 199 ---
SR Fash. 7 Fe

"BEFORE PRESCRIBING

* Pain cet, , Acon.; cham., coff.-

Delirium = Bell., hyos., stram.
Snake poison _ Lach., naja., crot.
Cough after pneumonia Kali-i., sang., stan. |
Fear and its consequences Acon., ign., op.

~ Drowsy - Ant-.., op., uc.
Vomits . | Ip, ant-t., iris,
Cholera _ 7 Camph., cup-m., verat.
Effects of grief . ‘Ign., nat-m., acid-phos.
Rheumatism : _Caust., rhus+t., . Sulph.
Upper Lips Bell. calc., nat-m.
Emaciation . - — mat-m., sars.;.lod.
Head Glon., bell., meli.
Eyelids droop. Gel., caust., sep.

Dr, J.T. Jent and his Trios of Sequence

They follow one another in the given order.

Acon., puls:, sil.
Coloc., caust., staph.
Caust., coloc., staph.

‘Merc., hep., sik

Puls., sil., kali-s.
‘Sulph., calc., lyco.
Sulph., sars., Sep.

“Am., rhus-t., calc.

Acon., hep:, spong _

196


--- Page 200 ---
_. AT AGGLANCE-

Sulph., ars., sulph. .

-Puls.,-sik., acid-fl.

- puo’s
Aloes. and sulph. . China and ferr. Bry. and alum.
All-c..and phos... Bell. and cale. = Mez. and merc.

Cham. and mag-c. ~ Puls. and kali-s.

Homoeopathy is based upon scientific footing and every prac-
_titioner is expected to know the relationship, one medicine bears
with the other. There are times when before giving the principle
medicine we are bound to give other short and mild acting rem-
edies. There are times, in a given condition the indicated remedy is
not given but another remedy is given, as can be seen from the
many instances given below. The principal medicines are given in
- the alphabetical order in order to help the busy practitioners, for a
quick reference. It is expected that until one gets acquainted with
“the relationship of medicines one may refer to this chapter as often
as possible before making a prescription and help the suffering hu- *
manity with the correct prescription.

Abortanum' __ Follows well (Acon., Bry.) in pleurisy,
os when a pressing sensa-

.. tion remains in affected

side impeding respira-

tion. After Hepar, in

boils.
Acetic acid Complementary Chin a.
Follows Chin a. in haemorrhage

age. Dig. in dropsy.

197


--- Page 201 ---
_ Complementary

Follows well

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Antidotes

Large doses dre anti-

doted by Magnes, and

‘Calc. Fluid Magnesia or

_ lime water may be taken
“in sips. Acetic ac. is an-

tidote to all anaesthetic

~-Wapours, Older vinegar:
vs antidotes carb-ac. -

Do not prescribe Acet-ac.
after Arn., bell., Lach.

~ and Merc. It agg. esp the

headache: after Bell

(Allen) —

Inimical

‘Borax, caust.; nux-v.,
- ran-b sars., bell.

) Arn, ‘in Ge ign .
.. Coff. in fever, pain, sleep-
-lessness. Sulph, in all,

cases. Aconite is acute of

_ Sulph.

; . Followed well

Arn, Coff., Sulp., Verat,
. Merc-fallows well in dys- -

entery.

Arn, Ars, Bell, Bry, Hep,

Sep. Sulph, Ip.

_ Ip in gastric states, after

- ABusé‘of Acon.

198.

pulmonary febrile affec-
tions.

‘Ars. in colic Bry.; spong.

in cough
Sulph.


--- Page 202 ---
Act-rac.

Adrenalin

_ ATAGLANCE |

2

Complementary

“Similar

Aesculus Hippo

Aethusa cynap.

Complementary
Follows well

Complementary ot

Similar

199.

Ign., Lilt., Nat-m., Puls.,
Sep. Oe
(Act-sp. Bry., Puls) in
rheumatism. The first is
preferable in rheumatism
of small joints, tearing

pains; joints ache after ex-

ercise.

Caul. ih uterine and rheu-
matic affections.

On account of its affinity
for oxygen the drug eas-
ily decomposes in water
and dilute acid solutions. .
The solution must be pro”

_ tected from light and air.

The solution must not be

too frequently repeated
owing to its tendency to
cause cardiac and arterial
lesions. For homoeopathic —
users 2x to 6x potencies

are better.

_ (Boericke)
Coll.
(Coll. Nux-y., Sulph.) in
piles
Cale.

Ant-c: Ars., Cale., Sanic.


--- Page 203 ---
Tr

bos

i

Agaricus musc

Agnus-castus

Allium-cepa

BEFORE PRESCRIBING .

Cumplementary

* Follows well

Similar _

2.

Acted well after

cured when

After agn.c. are

useful

Complementary

Followed by. _
Similar

200

“Jn irritable weakness of

accomodation apparatus

of eye : Physostigma

(pain after using eves
flashes of light; myopia)
Bell., Calc., merc., op.,
puls., rhus-t., sil...
(Act., Cale., Cann.,
Hyos., Kali-p., Lach.,
Nux—yv., op., Stram.) in
delirium of alcoholism
(myg al., tarent., zinc.).in
chorea.

Dulc., ph-ac. pul. cupe

had failed.

Bell, stram., hyos. has
failed. .

Ars. bry., Ign., Lye.,

puls., sulph. (calad., sel.)
~ insexual weakness & im-

potency.

Phos.,puls. thuj.

(Calc.,sil.) in polypus.

Euph., but coryza and

-lachrymation are oppo-

site.


--- Page 204 ---
Aloe.soc.

Alumina

Ambra-g.

_ AT AGLANCE .

Complementary ,

teeta

eo.

Antidote

Similar

~ Complementary

Follows

Antidote

Similar to

Simular to

201 .

like Sulph in many
chronic discasses with ab-

~“domuinal picthora and con-

gestion of portal circul
ation.

Sulph.-when Aloe has
been abused as purgative.

=: Amm-m., gamb-., mux;
podo.

Bry., alum. is chronic of

bry. ~
Bry., lach., sulph. Fol-
lowed by bry.

Alum., bry., camph.,
cham. Alum. antidotes.

.lcad-poisoning as in

paintcr’s colic, ailments:
from Icad.

Bar-c. (in old people),
bry, gastric:and abdomi-
nal symptoms, constipa-
tion, throbbing headache,

_,dry cough, stitches in
_ chest) plb (colic, consti-
* pation)

Ars., (cardiac asthma),

- Act-r. (night cough),

coca., ign, mosch (hys-

~ teric asthma) op., phos.,
'. nux-y., ph-ac., puls, sep,
-Sulph, Sulph-ac, Valer.


--- Page 205 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Amm-carb..

Amm-mur.

Anacardium ~

Anthracinum

Similar'to

 Inimical

Followed by

Similar to

’ Complementary
Follows well

Followed by

Complementary

202°

Amni-m.
Lach.

. >
It antidotes poisoning

with rhus, and stings of

. insects.

oh Ant-c., phos ., puls.,
Amm-c., ant-c., aloes.

«,,{abdominal. symptoms)

Calc. (fat people; profuse

_ menses) con. -(night

~ Cought) Caust. (Stiff
joints, contraction of

~muscles),. Coloc. (In

colic) hep., iod., Kali-bi.,
_ Kali-iod., mere., merc-c.,
mag-m., (crumbling
stool) nux-v., rhus-t.,

-#(sprain, Joints. Worse Sit-

ting), Seneg, (fat-people),
Sep., Sil., Sulph.

Rhus-t., rhus-v.
Lyc., plat., puls:
Plat. —

Euphor. in terrible pains
of cancer, Carbuncle or
erysipelas When Ars.
fails


--- Page 206 ---
. ATAGLANCE. .

Similar

Antimonium c. Complementary
a Follows well

Antidotes’.
Antimonium-t. Follows well
Similar
Apis m. Complementary

Follows well

203

(Ars., Carb-ac., lach.,
- $ec., pyTog.)

malignant & Septic
Condition

- Squilla.

~Merc., Puls., Sulph.
Stings of insects.

. Bry. (rheumatism,

gastric, symptoms),
hep., ip., Lyc., mere.,
nux-v., puls., rhus-t.,
sulph, |

Ip. When lungs seem to

fail.

Lyc., but motion of alae
is replaced by dilated

, nostrils.

Merat -1 dyspnoea, colic,
vomiting, coldness.
Thuj., sil,-after vaccina-
tion.

- Sil.-in dysponea from for-
“eign body.
. Puls.-in suppressed gon-
_ orrhoea.

: Nat-m.
“(Canth., dig, bell) in al-
‘buminuria.


--- Page 207 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Followed by Ars. puls.
Antidote * Massive doses, poisoning
-and stings are antidoted
by Nat-m. (crude salt so-
lution and potencies)

onion.
Apts will be antidoted by ,
hot baths.
_Disagrees, when used be-
fore or after rhus-t.
Inimical Rhus-t.:
Apocynum Cannab. ‘(Acet-acid, apis (no

thirst) ars., china., dig.) in
.. dropsical affections. .

-Argentum met. «Cured gonorrhoea after |
camn., copaiva and mer-

cury failed.

‘Complementary —Stann, in cough excited.
‘by laughing.

Follows after . Alum, plat.

Followed by“. Calc., puls., sep.

‘Antidote to --Arg-met., merc.; puls.

Uterine and ovarian
symptoms, similar to
Pallad., the later on the
right side Arg-met on the
‘eft.

204


--- Page 208 ---
AT A-GLANCE ~ >

Arg-nit. Follows well... Bry., caust. (urethral af- |
“Followed by Kali-c. lyco., sep. -
Antidote = . > Nat-m. (chemical and -
_ _ dynamic)
Similar Aur. cup., lach., nat-m.,
: nit-ac.

The main difference between the metal and the nitrate, is
that the later acts mainly on the mucous membrane, the skin,
and especially on the bones and periosteum, while the former

acts especialy on the cartilages.

“ArnicaM. Complementary Hyper. in spinal concus
sion,
Canth. is sometimes used
as an antidote. If Amica
failed in haemorrhages
‘after injury, [would think
millefolium. If Arnica
failed try Collinsonia.
ve« The erysipelas produced
by Amica may often be
cured by the application
of a camphor lotion (40
drops of spirits of cam-
phor in half a pint of wa-
ter) and by the internal
administration of the drug
_ at the same time. A too >
‘strong Camphor lotion
often produces unpleas-
“ant results.

205


--- Page 209 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Followed by
Antidote

Inmmical

Apocynum Cannab,

Argentum met.

Complementary

Follows after
Followed by
Antidote to

204

Massive doses, poisoning
by Nat-m (crude salt so-
lution and potencies)
onion

Apis will be antidoted by
hot baths

Disagrees, when used be-
fore or after rhus-t
Rhus-t.

(Acet-acid, apis (no
thirst) ars., china., dig.) in

Cured gonorrhoea after
cann., copaiva and mer-
cury failed.

Stann, in cough excited
by laughing.

Alum., plat

Atg-met_, merc, puls
Uterine and ovarian
symptoms, similar to
Pallad.. the later on the
right side Arg-met on the
left.


--- Page 210 ---
AT A GLANCE

Arg-nit. Follows well Bry.. cavst. (urethral af-
fection)
Followed by Kali-c. lyco\, sep
Antidote Nat-m (chemical and
dynamic)
Similar Aur. cup_ lach., nat-m.,
nit-ac.

The main difference between the metal and the nitrate, is
that the later acts mainly on the mucous membrane, the skin,
and especially on the bones and periosteum, while the former
acts especialy on the cartilages.

Arnica M. Complementary § Hyper in spinal concus
sion.
Canth. 1s sometimes used
as an antidote. If Arnica
failed in haemorrhages
after injury, | would think
millefolium. If Arnica
failed try Collinsonia
The crysipelas produced
by Amica may often be:
cured by the application
of a camphor lotion (40
drops of spirits of cam-
phor in half a pint of wa-
ter) and by the internal
administration of the drug
at the same time. A too
strong Camphor lotion
often produces unpleas-
ant results

205


--- Page 211 ---
Biome TE UBM su

Chamomilla -- —

Chelidonium M

Cicuta vy.

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Incompatible

Complementary:

Antidotes

- Complementary
. Follows well
“Followed by
| : “Antidotes

Follows well
~ Followed by

Incompatible

216

(Carbo-veg., rumx.) in
hoarseness.

Sulph., in chronic apho-
nia,

Phos. acids, coffea Must:

~ not be used before and

afte Phos: Always dis-
agrees,

~Mag-c., bell.;’puls.” In

children’s diseases : bell.-
cranial nerves
Chamomilla-abdominal
nerves Bell., bor., bry.,
coff., puls., sulph.

Cases spoiled by op. or
morphia in complaints of
children.

Acon. .Bry.,lyc.,merc.,
- MUX-V., Sang, sep., sulph,

Bry., if abused in hepatic
complaints.

Ars., lyc., sulph., to com-
plete cure..

Abuse of bry. in hepatic
complaints.

Calc-p.,in hydrocephalus.
Cale-p., ferr., ph-ac.
After dig., Sel.


--- Page 212 ---
- AT AGLANCE| —

China

Cina.

Coca:

Cocculus

Complementary”

Ferr. Chin-s.,in intermit-
tent fever.

Tarent., in intérmittent
fever.

Tarent., in intermittent

_-» fever of nervous or hys-

~ Antidotes

terical women.

Excessive use of tea
drinking, when

. haemorrhage results;

- Complementary

Follows well

‘Complementary "

Ars., ip.

{Ant-c., ant-t., bry.,
cham., kreost., sil.,
staph.) in irritability of
children. ,
Ant-t Dros. in pertussis.
(Acon., phos., spofig.) in
aphonia, after they had
failed.

‘Stram. desires light and

company. Coca desires

___ darkness and solitude.

| - Complementary

Follows well

217

(Ign, nux-v.) in chorea
and paralytic symptoms.
Anti-t., in sweat of af-
fected parts.

Nux-v., in abdominal her-
nia with obstinate consti-
pation.


--- Page 213 ---
Coffeac,. ..

Colchicum

Collinsenia

Colocynth

Incompatible .-.

‘Complementary

Antidoted by

Complementary :

Follows well. .

Complementary

218

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Canth., caust., cocc., ign.
As a pain remedy we

would not give Coffea in

habitual coffee drinker

Bry.in rheumatic gout
with serous effusions.

. > Cures dropsy when Apis

and Ars. fails.

Bell, camph., coce,

nux-v., puls.

For the affections of heart
feels as if dying-Spig. ce-
pious draughts of nce
water prevents its action
on the bowels.

Aesc., aloe., cham., nux-
v., sulph. consult Coll.
when Cact. fails in heart
disease. 7

_ (Coloc, Nux-v) fail in
colic, when.

Merc. in dysentery
Graph. in sciatica. Staph.

~~ from bad effects of anger,

indignation, silent grief.

In agg. of colic,. give a

cup of coffee to paliate

oyand repeat coloc. if nec-

essary. Smoking relieves
pain in bowels.


--- Page 214 ---
Conium M -

€recus Sat,

Crotalus H

Croton tig.

AT A-GLANCE

Followed by

Antidotes
Antidoted by

Complementary

‘Bell. bry., caust., cham

mere., nux-v.
Caust.

Camph., coff,, staph.

_(Am., chus.), in contu-
“Ysion. (Ars., aster.) In can~

-p cer. (Calc., psor.) in glan-
» dular swelling.

Followed by

Complementary

Followed OY

Antidoted by:

Complementary

_ Complementary —

Antidotes
219

Psor., in tumors of mam-
mae.

Antidotes Nit-ac.

Ust., in menstrual disor-
ders.

Nux-v., puls., or sulph. in
nearly all complaints.

Acon., bell., op.

elaps., lach., naja., pyrog.
Elaps., affections of nght
lung, expectoration of
black blood. Lach., skin
cold and clammy. Crot;’
skin cold and dry.

(Kali-br., phos.) in
chronic infantile diar-
rhoea. Sil., in pain from:
nipple through to back
when nursing.

Rhus-t. poisoning.


--- Page 215 ---
h at
i a

Digitalis; :

Dioscoria Vill.

Dolichos

‘Cyclamen E.

BEFORE PRESCRIBING,

~.. Complementary

Antidotes

Complementary

Antidoted by»

Antidote

Complementary

.€alc Gels., in over

worked brain. Zinc., in

___,,hydrocephalus from sup-
“pressed eruption.

Followed by (Apis.,
zinc..) in convulsions

from suppressed erup=

tions. Verat., in whoopmng
cough and cholera.
(Ars., verat.) in cholera,

vand cholera morbus.

Cupr-ars., excellent in
severe burming cramping .
pains within the abdo-

en.
‘Bell:

(Chin., fer. puls.), in

anaemia and chlorosis.

(Croc., thuj.) in, as if
somethitig alive in abdo-.
fen. OE
Camph.; coff:, puls.,

Chin., nit-ac.

coloc.,. phos., podo.,

- In teething, if feverish symptoms exist, always

give a dose of Acon., before Dolichos, other-
wise convulsions will follow.

220


--- Page 216 ---
Drosera Rat.

Duleamara

_-Follows well
- Followed.by .

AT A GLANCE:

Complementary...

4 Complementary
- Follows’ well.

. . Antidotes

Elaterium —

Equisetum

Eupatorium per.

Similar

_ Inimical

Complementary

Complementary: : °°

Complementary

221.

“Apis.,
-puls., squilla.

Chin, corr., cupr., ip.,
samb.,) in spasmodic

>. scough.

Samb., Sulph., Verat.

ceealc., puls., sulph.,

~ bar-.

bry.s.calc., lyc., rhus.,

a eSD. ,
_.Abuse of Merc.

Kali-s. the chemical ana-

_ logue.

Merc., in ptyalism glan-
dular swellings, bronchi-
tis, diarrhoea.

Acet.-ac., bell.

croton-tig., sec. (Olive
green diarrhoea) verat-
alb., colch (cholera like

. symptoms)

canth., ferr-p.;

(Chel., podo., lyco.) in

_ jaundiced conditions.

Brv., has free sweat and
is a quiet patient. Eup-
per., is restless and has
scanty sweat.


--- Page 217 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Followed by .--
Euphrasia . ‘Followed by
+ Similar
Ferrum-Met. Complementary
Followed by
Antidoted by
Ferrum-Phos, —
Flouric-Acid. Complementary.

Follows well

222°

-Nat-m.; sep.)

China., in nearly all dis-

‘Puls., affections of eyes.

Reverse of All-c., in

-. coryza and lachrymation.

Alum., Chin.

~ Chin., in nearly all dis-

eases, acute or chronic.
Ars., Chin., Hep., Ipec.,
Puls.

Bell., Sulph. failed with

‘indicated symptoms.

Ferr-phos did wonders on
the basis that congestion.
belongs to all preparation
of Iron.
(Dr. E.A. Farrington

_-€oca., Sil.

Ars. in ascites of drunk-
ards. Kali carb im hip dis-

_ eases. (Coff., Staph.) in

sensitive teeth. Ph-ac., im
diabetes. (Sil., Symph_,)
in bone diseases. Spong.,
in goitre.”


--- Page 218 ---
Gelsemium: -. -

Glonoine

Graphites

Guaiacum

- ATAGLANCE.

Complementary _

’ Complementary

Complementary

' . Follows well

7 Antidotes
__ Antidoted by

Similar

~ Follows well
‘Antidotes

Antidoted by

223:

_ leucorrhoea.

Bapt., in typhoid. Ipes,;in
ague., after suppression
of quinine.

Amyl-n., Bell., Ferr.,
Gels., meli., Stram.

Caust., Hep., Lyco., Ars.

-Lyco., Puls. Cale. in fat

women. Sulph. in skin
diseases. Sep. in gushing

(Dr. Allen)
Ars., lod., Rhus-tox.

Acon. (for the cought).
Ars. (for the grief), Nux-

_ vom,
~ (Lyco., Puls) in menstrual -

troubles.

Guaiac. has proved ude-!
ful after abuse of Merc,

rheumatism, gout, con-

traction,

Caust., which had much
increased the contraction
of limbs in a rheumatic
patients; also rhus-t.
Nux-vom., Sulph. in
cholera infantrum


--- Page 219 ---
RAM tare

Micnurit

Hamamelis~ -

Helleborus. N.

Helonias-D.

Hepar-sulph. |

BEFORE PRESCRIB

~ Complementary

ING

Ferr. in haemorrhage.
(Arn., calen.) in trauma-
tism. and to hasten ab-
sorption of intra-ocular

., haemorrhage. In uncon-

Complementary

Complementary
Similar —

Complementary __

Follows well

; Followed by

scious patient, if it fails
than use zinc. high, the
reaction will set in with
“sweat, diarrhoea or vom-
‘iting after tingling and
screaming.

- (Apis., apoc., ars., bell.,

bry., dig., lach., sulph.,
tub., zinc.) in brain or
meningeal affections.

Aletris., ferr,, lilt, ph-ac.

 Aletris in debility.

Calen., in injury. In skin.

‘affections Sulph., dry,
itching and not sensitive.
Hepar moist unhealthy

_ suppurative and sensitive,
Acon., am., bell., lach.,

merc., nit-ac.
Acon., ars., bell., bry.,

.. «lod, lach., merc., nit-ac.,

274.

sulph.


--- Page 220 ---
Hydrastis

Hypericum . .

Ignatia - :

- WPA GLANCE:

- Antidoted- by

Complementary
, op.)-in haemoptysis..of

Follows well:

Followed by

| Complementary

“Merc. and other metals?’

iodine, iodide of potash,

~ eod liver oil,
- Acet-ac., bell., cham.,

Bell., stram., verat. (nux.,

drunkards...

Bell., in deafness after
apoplexy.

Phos. in lasciviousness. -

Am. Arn., calen., ruta,
staph.

It is best to administer in the morning, if there .
is no occasion for hurry, than shortly before
bed time, it causes too much restlessness at

night.

Antidotes

_.-Antidoted by. »

Inimical
Incompatible .

225°

(Hahnemann)

7 When it will not hold any longer, comes to
_ place, Nat-m. should follow.

Zincum.

Z Arn., camph.,:cham.,:

cocc., coff., nux-v., puls.
Coff,, tab.
Coff., nux-v., tab.


--- Page 221 ---
‘Todine.

Ipecac.

Kali-Bich -

Complementary

Follows well

Followed by

‘Complementary

Followed by

Complementary

‘Follows well

_ Followed by

226.

-BEFORE-PRESCRIBING

. (Acet-ac., brom., con.,

Kali-bi., spong) in mem-
branous croup and

. croupy affections.

Hepar., merc.

Kali-bi., in croup.

Cupr.

It is true that when pa-

' tients have bled until they

have become anaemic and

: : are subject to dropsy. lp-

ecac to be the remedy; its

_, natural followers then in

China, will bring — the
patient in position to need
an antipsoric remedy,
(Dr. J.T. Kent)
Ars., in influenza, chill,
croup, debility, cholera
Ant-t., in foreign body in
larynx.
(Ant-c., Puls) m gastric
troubles.

(Brom, hep., Iod.) in
croupy affections. -
(Canth, Carb-ac) in dys-
entery. Iod., in croup.
Calc. in nasal catarrh..
Ant-t., in catarrhal affec-
tion and skin diseases.


--- Page 222 ---
Kali-brom

Kali-carb’

Kaliiod. —

Kalmia Lat. -

Kreosotum

Antidotes: coe; Ars., Lach., (Croup,

- Diptheria etc.) Puls.
Follows well =. . Eugenia jambos, in acne
~ Antidote: It antidotes lead poison-

Complementary © Carbo-v. Bry., Lyco.,

Nat-m., Nit-ac., Stann. .

Follows well -~ (Kali-s., Phos, Stann) in
Rie loose rattling cough. Nat-

m., when it fails to bring
menses.

_ After abuse of Mere.
Against abuse of iodide

of potash, Hep.
Follows well. --. Spig. in heart disease. .
’ Similar (Led., Rhod., Spig.,) in
rheumatic and gouty af-
fections.
Followed by ‘(Ars., Phos., Sulph) in

malignant diseases,
Antidoted by 4g Nux-y, against violent
pulsations in every part of
the body. Acon., against
the vascular irritation.

 Inimical - Carbo-v.

227



--- Page 223 ---
Lachesis ae

Lac-can.

Led-pal.

Lil-tig

Lobelia Inf.

Lyco.

Followed by

- Similar

‘Complementary: *:

Follows

: Incompatible. on

Complementary

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Hep., Lyc., Nit-ac., Bar-
¢ in carbuncle, the pains
are atrocious.

Ars., Bell., Mere:,: Nit-

. ac., Hep.

Nat-m., in intermittent
fever, when type changes.

-Acet-ac., Carb-ac.

— Apis., Con., Kali-bi.,

Lach., Murx., Puls., Sep.,
Sulph. ne

(Am., Bellis-p., Crot-t.,
Ham., Ruta) in trauma-
tism. Con., in lasting ef-

' fects of injury.

' Complementary -

Complementary

_ Complementary. .

Act., Agar, ©. Cact,;
Helon., Murx., Nat-p.,
Plat., Sep., Spig., Tarent.

Ant-t., Ars.; Ip., Tab.,
Verat.~ eee

Chel., Iod.; Lach., Ip., (in
capillary bronchitis). Sul-
phur acts well if given
after Lyco. but not before.

_., A dose of Carbo-v. every
~ eightth day facilitates its

228.

action. An occasional


--- Page 224 ---
Lycopus Vir —

‘Lyssm
Mag-carb

Mag-phos.

Medorrhinum

Follows well

~ Followed by.

Antidotes

_. Antidoted by

- Complementary

~ . Complementary --
- Complementary

“Complementary

Complementary

229

dose of Lyco. helps the
action of Berberis.

Calc., Carbo-v., Lach.,
Sul

Bell., Lach.
Lyco. antidotes Chin.

Acon., Camph., Caust.,
Cham., Graph., Puls.

Dig. (which has strong

and slow pulse or weak
pulse, quickened by
movement), Cactus,
Spig., Kalm., ham.

(Bell., Canth., Hyos4
Stram.) in hydrophobia. -

Cham. in diseases of chil-
dren,

Bell., Caulo., Coloc.,
Lac-c., lyco., puls.
Cham., is its vegetable
analogue.

Ip. in dry cough
(Camph, sec., tab., verat.)
in collapse.

(Pic-ac., gels) in inability
to walk.



--- Page 225 ---
Melilotus Alba

Menyanthes

Mercurius

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

(Aloes, sulph)., in moern-
ing diarrhoea. -

sorhe burning feet of

Sulph, and the restless.
fidgety legs and feet of
Zinc, are both found at

the same time in

~ *medorrhinum,

Compementary

- Complementary.

Follows well

(Amyl-n, ant-c.,) in

-.. epistaxis after headache,

~ but does not relieve.
(Bell., glonoine., sang.)
in congestive headache,
red face, hot head.

oiCale,, cact., gels. ;.. mag~
m., paris., Sep.
Caps., lach., lyc., puls.,

_.) . rhus., verat.

Complementary

Follows well

Antidotes »

bad., Mez., its vegetable
analogue, Mere and sil.

do not follow each other
well. Low potency has-
tens suppuration, rather
than aborts.

__-Bell., hep., lach., sulph.
” Ars., bell., calc., nit-ac.,

sulph.

Aur., hep., lach., mez.,
nit-ac., sulph. and high
potency of Merc.


--- Page 226 ---
Merc-c

Mezerium

Millefohum _

Murex Pur.

Muriatic.-ac.

Myrica C
Naja ¢.

Nat-c.

AT AGLANCE

Antidoted by

. Complementary

“Antidoted by |
- Complementary
Follows well

Complementary

~ Follows well

Antidotes —

Complementary

Complementary

Complementary

231

. Caust., guaiac., phyt.,

Calc. (headache), nux-v.

’ (neuralgia of eye), merc.

-Erecht, in epistaxis and

haemoptysis, blood bright
red.

(Acon., arn) In
haemorrhage.

(Lil-t., plat.) in nympho-
mania. Sep., in bearing
down sensation but has no
sexual erythism.

Bry., merc., rhus.
Excessive use of Op. and .

tobacco, in muscular

weakness.

Dig. Gaundice), Chel.,
. podo.

AIS., cact., crot-h., lach.,

Nat-s (for yeast like vom-
iting), Calc., sep.


--- Page 227 ---
Follows well

Nat-n. ~ Complementary ~
___ Follows well
Followed by
_ Antidotes. - .
‘Nat-S.. ~~ Complementary
Niccolum Complementary
Nitric-ac. | . Complementary

232

_BEFOREPRESCRIBING =

- Sep, in bearing down:?

Apis., Sep.
~ Apis., ign
 Apis., sep., thuj.

Ars., for bad effects of sea

bathing,
Nitrate of Silver, quinine, .

bee stings.

7 - If vertigo and headache be |

very presistant or
prostration be prolonged

_ after Nat, Nux-v will Te-
~ lieve.

(H.C Allen)

If Merc. has already been
used without avail Nit-ac.

follows well and will of-
ten cure. .

. Nat-m..and sulph. which

are very similar.

(Merc.,: thuj.) in syphilis
and sycosis in
hydrogenoid constitution.
Cobalt., ferr., zinc. nux-
v., (Literary men, morn-

~- ing symptoms)

Ars. (Annual hoarseness)
Ars., calad.


--- Page 228 ---
Nux-mos,. -.-

-Nux-yv. .

~ AP A-GLANCE

Follows well. - . Ars. , (in abuse, of 1 mer-

=)
Cale., carb-ac. {in bubo)

Hep (in throat affections)
Kali-c. (in Phthisis)
Mez. (in secondary syphi-

lis)

On Nat-c., puls., sulph., thu.
‘ - Followed by Arn., in collapse. in
ae dysentry.
~ Antidotes Abuse of mercury, and

seyetsubad effects of dig.
Ars., in morbid fear of
cholera. .
Merc. suits light-haired.
Nit-ac. suites black-

. a haired.
“" ” Antidoted. by Calc., hep., merc., mez.,
Inimical Lach
.- Antidotes Mercurial inhalation, lead

colic, oil of turpentine,
spiritous: (esply.) bad
.. beer.

” Complementary Dros., sulph.
Followed well © Ars. ip., ‘phos., sep.,

sulph.

~“Bollowed by Bry., phos., puls., sulph.


--- Page 229 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

inimical

Antidoted by

234

“Zine must not be. used

before or after.

If vertigo-headache be
very persistent or prostra-
tion be marked after nat..
nux. well relieve

(H.C. Allen)

Carbo-V. is an excellent
remedy in-various dis-

“eases of the system esp.

after Nux. has failed.
(Dr. Coperthwaite)

Phos. when it has been
incorrectly given or it has

‘produced over effects.

Nux-v. is closely related
to Sulph. often antidotes
the over action of Sulph.

_. It seldom goes to the bot-

tom and antidotes the con-
stitutional action of sulph.

‘but it will remove its ex-
aggerated action, its su-
+. perficial action. -

(Dr. J.T. Kent)

Nux-v should be given on
retiring, it acts best dur-
ing repose of body and

- mind. Coffee must never
_. be taken where Nux-v. is

the remedy similarly with
Cham.


--- Page 230 ---
Opium

Paris Quad.

Fetroleum

Petroselinum

Phosphoric acid

_ ATA GLANCE.

Complementary
Antidotes
—“Antidoted by

“Kali permang and con-
‘ stant motion), for poison-

_ Ars., bell, hyos., stram.,

Bell. dig., lach., merc.,

nux-v., plb., stram.,
strychnine, tart. emet.
(Strong Coffee,.Nux.,

ous doses.

~* Potencies, for Opium

Followed well by’
Antidoted by

_ Antidotes

| Complementary

_. Complementary

Follows well

Followed by

drugging.

Led., lyc., rhus-t.

| Coffea.

. Lead poison.

(Canth., merc.) in sudden

urging to urine.

. Phos., pic-acid., puls., sil.

Mur-ae: in typhoid.

~., China., in colliquative

sweat, diarrhoea, debility.

. Nux., in fainting after

meal.
China, in colliquative
sweat, diarrhoea, debility.

‘Cale-p., ferr., kali-p.,
-phos., lyco., sulph.


--- Page 231 ---
Phosphorus :

Physostigma _

Phytolacca .

Picric-acid =~

Platina

Plumbum=

_ BEFORE PRESCRIBING _

ad Complementary “ Alkc., ars.

Follows well _ Cale., china., kali-c.,

- ~" |yoo., thux., rhus., sil,
a sulph.
, . “Incompatible. . Caust.-

~ Removes bad effects of iodine and excessive
use of table salt.

Complementary Bell. con., cur., gel.,
- hyper., stry.

~ Tt occupies a position between Bry. and rhus.,
cures when these fail, though apparently indi-

“cated.

: Complementary ~ Arp-nit., gel, kali-p. ph:

ac., phos., petr., sil.

Complementary — Aur, croc., ign., kali-p,

puls., sep., stan.

Antidotes’ "Bad effects ‘of lead’ °? "*
‘‘Antidotes =- ~- Alum., petr, plat., sul-ac.
‘early (Alum., plat., op.) in
- colic.

*Podo, retraction of navel.

~ Nux., _in strangulated
hernia.
Podo, its vegetable ana-
logue.

336


--- Page 232 ---
Pedephilum.

Psorinum

Pulsatilla

AT-A GLANCE, «

Complementary

Follows well

Antidotes

Complementary
Follows well

~ Followed by

~ Complementary

Follows well

Followed by
: Antidotes

237

©. chronic.

Aloes., chel., coll, lil-t,
merc., ftux., sulph.
([p., nux.),in gastric af-

- fection. 7 rs
| (Cale, sulph), in iver dis-

ease.
Bad effects of merc.

‘Lac-ac., nux-v. 6°

Sulph., tub.

Lac-a¢.. in vomiting of
pregnancy. .
Am., in. traumatic af-

'- fections of ovaries.

Alum., bor., hep., sulph.,
tub.
Sulph., in mammary
cancer. De SS
kali-sulph., kali-mur.,
lyc., sil., sul-ac.
Kali-sulph and sil., its
Kali-bi., kali-mur., lyc.,
sep., sil., sulph.

Kali-mur. ps

[ron., quinine, tonics re-

‘sulting in anaemia and
’ chlorosis.


--- Page 233 ---
Pyrogen

Ratanhia

Ranunculus Bulb.

Rheum

Rhododendron

Rhus-tox

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Abuse of cham., mercury
tea drinking, sulph.

Complementary = Ars., carb-ac., carb-v.,

op., psor.,. rhus., sec.,
yerat. .

_ Complementary... Canth., carb-ac., iris.,

sulph., thuj.
Complementary _ Acon., arn., bry., clem.,
: euphorb., mez.

Antidoted by _Bry., camph., puls., thus-t
Inimical ~ Dule., staph., sulph., vin-
-,. epar, wine,

Incompatible Staph., sulph.

Complementary Mag~-c., Cham., coloc.,

hep., ip., mag-c., podo.,
_ Staph. sulph,

Follows well - Mag-c. .

Complementary Bry.,.cale., con., led. lye.
- Thust., sep.

Complementary _ Am., bry., “calc. Arm.
__ _bry., nat-sulph., rhod.,
‘ gulph. -

Follows well Am., bry., calc., calc-p.

cham., lach., ph-ac.,
sulph.

238


--- Page 234 ---
Rumex C.

Ruta G. oo

Sabina

‘Sabadilla .

Followed by . - ». Am, ags., delly.eonier.. :
Antidotes coe Bry., renanc., rhed., tart.

emet..

me ‘Antidoted by +». -Bell., bry., camph., coff.

crott., sulph.

fnimical t to . Apis must not be used

~~-before or after. -

: Complementary _ Bell., caust., dros., hyos.

phos., sang., sulph.

Complementary Arn., arg-n., con., euphr.
_ phyt., rhus., symph.

Follows s well Arn., in joint affections
Lop Symphytum in injuries of
__,, bones.

Complementary Calc., croc., mill.; sec.,

trill.

- Follows well Thuj., in condylomata

a __, ,,and sycotic affections.
Antidoted by "Duls.

Complementary (Coloc., colch. lye), in4

to 8 p.m. aggravation.
_,-, (Puls., sabin), in open air
, amel.

Follows well ~ (Bry., ran-b,), inpleurisy.

‘239


--- Page 235 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Sambucus N.

Sanguinaria _

Sanicula

Sarsaparilla

Secale cor.

‘Complementary

Follows well, -

Follows well. -

Antidotes

‘Complementary
“Antidotes

Related to .

~ Antidoted by .

Complementary

Antidotes
Anti-by

Complementary

240

- Relieves ailments from abuse of ars.

China., chlor., ip., meph.
sulph.

After op. m consequences
of fright.

Bell.,,in scarlatina.
Narcosis of op. Comp.

_. Bell, iris. meli), in sick

headache.

({Lach., sulph.), in climac-
teric affections. (Chel.,
phos., sulph., verat-v), it
chronic bronchitis. ,

Berb., lyc., nat-m., phos. _
Abuse of merc.
Abrot., alum., bor., calc.

ss ~Graph., nat-m., she".

Merc., sep., either of

“which follows well.
__ Bell., merc.

merc., sep., either of

which follows well. Berb.

Lyco., Nat m., phos
Abuse of merc.

7 Bell. merc

Cinnamon, which in-

creases Jabor pain, checks
profuse haemorrhage.


--- Page 236 ---
Selenium

Sepia

Silicea

ATA GLANCE:

Follows well’ °

“> Similar

Complementary“

Follows well.

- Antidotes

Antidoted by
“Tncompatible’’ mS

; Complementary
. Follows well

Similar

Inimical

Complementary tary
oe _ Hep., hyper., kali-p., pic-

_ Follows well :

241

After china.

Ars., but cold and heat
opposite.

Phos., in genito-urinary”
and respiratory symp-
toms. (Arg-m. and stan.)}:
in laryngitis of singers

| _ and speakers.

Alum., hard stool.
(Calad., nat., staph., ph-

- ac.) in sexual weakness. ~

Suppressed itch by
mercurials and sulphur.

Ign., puls.
China., wine.

Nat-m.

~ Puls., sil., sulph.

(Lach., sang., ust.), in cli-

macteric irregularities.

Lach., puls.

Fl-ac., puls., sanic., thuj.,

ac., ruta., sanic.

(Gettysberg)
Calc., graph., hep., nit-
ac, phos.


--- Page 237 ---
Spigelia

Spongia Tosta

Squila’

Stannum

‘Staphysagria i:

.. Complementary, .- :-
bet ‘kali-c. kalmia., naja.,
 spong.), in heart disease.

Follows
Followed by

“Complementary
-.. nux-m.) sputa loosened,

rae
JUL

. ; Follows well

"Followed by :

Complementary

- Complementary

Follows well

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Puls.

»-Fl-ac., hep., lyco., sep.
. Antidotedby  Fl-ac.,

hep.

(Acon., ars., cact., dig.,

Acon. (endocarditis).

-- (Ars., dig., kali-c.) in
heart symptoms

(Arm, caust., iod., lach.,

but must be swallowed

_, (Acon., hep.), in cough
and croup, when ‘dryness
_ prevails.

Hep., when mucous com-

~ menices to rattle.

Bry.

Caust., coloc., ign., lyco.,
puls.
Coloc.

(Caust., coloc., staph),.
follows well in order
named.


--- Page 238 ---
4K A GUANCE

_Stramonium -

‘Sulphur ©

- Followed-by °° a

~ Follows’ well

Followed by

“Antidotes

Roe ~-Complementaiy: °

F ollows. well

Followed by

Antdotes

Coloc.

Bell., cur., hyos., lyss.
Sec., in metrorrhagia,

‘-~from retained placenta,

after failure of stram.
Over action of Bell. in
whooping cough.

Acon., aloes., nux., puls.,
psor..

‘“}t is chronic ‘of acon.,

nux., puls.
Sulph., comphments
Rhus. in paralysis.

- (Sulph., calc., lve.) follow

in order. (Ant-t., ip.) mn
lung affections especially
left side. .

_ Acon., alum., ars., bell.,
bry. calce., graph., lyc.,

merc., nit-ac., nux.,
phos., sars., sep.
Camph., merc., puls.

“> Abuse of metals’ ©

generally.

When a patient is aggravated by Sulph., we
must always think of the existence of latent
state of syphilis, if Puls., another antidote of
Sulph. does not produce any results,
Syphilinum is an antidote to Sulphur.

243

(Dr. Lean Richard)


--- Page 239 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING -

eh Bry. and Sulph. compliment each other, but,
: Q of course, the symptoms must decide and may

4 : decide in favour of neither of them.

-Sulpburic acid = Complementary.

Follows. well
. Followed by .

-. Antidotes

(Dr. E.B. Nash)

, , Sulphur cm is complimented by Graphites cm.

- Puls., Ars., bor., calend.,

led., rheum., ruta,
symph. |

(Am. con,, led., ruta.) in
"injury. )

Arn., calc., con., lyc.,
sulph.

Ip., puls.

In contusion and laceration of soft parts, i it
vies with Calendula. :

Symphytum’ so Complementary

Follows well

Syphilinum _ Complementary -

244

Arn., calend., caic-p.,

. fl.ac., hep., sil.

Arn., in injury, for sore-
ness of periosteum re-
maining after an injury.

(Aur, asaf., kali-i, merc.,
phyt.} im bone disease and
in syphilitic affections.


--- Page 240 ---
AT A GLANCE

- Tabacum ~ Antidotes ~~ Ars., for bad effects: of
tobacco chewing.
Clem. or plant, for to-
bacco toothache.

Gel., for occipital head-
‘ache and vertigo. ~

Ign., for hiccough from
- =: tobacco chewing. »
Ip., for nausea and vom-
itmg. a
Lyco for impotence,
spasm and cold sweat.
Nux. for gastric symp-
_. toms, next morning.
‘Phos., for palpitation,
Tobacco-heart, sexual
weakness.

Sep., neuralgic affections
of right side of face; dys-
pepsia;, chronic nervous-
ness.
Aversion — Plant-maj. has caused an
“= " aversion to tobacco,
sometimes.

Taraxacum. = ~-—S- Complementary Bry., chel., hydr., nux., in
ce gastric and bilious affec-
tions.

Tarentula = Similar Apis.,crot.,lach., mygal.,
naja., plat., ther.

245


--- Page 241 ---
“Terebinth < .

Theridion. _

Thlaspi B.P.: -

Thuja Occ.

Trillium p.

TJuberculinum

Complementary

: 7 Follows well
i Complementary.
: Complementary

‘Follows well

- alumen., ars.

BEFORE PRESCRIBING

, canth.,

lach., nit-ac.
Recommended as pro-

phylactic in malaria.

Calc., lyco.

Sinapis.,trill., vib., ust

Med., sabin., sil., Cann-
s., canth., cop., staph.
Med., merc., nit-ac.

Cinnab. is preferable for warts on prepuce.

‘Complementary

Complementary -

‘Follows well

246

| For the bad effects of vaccination when Thuja
- fails and sil is not indicated, try Ant-t.

Tea abuse of, is antidoted by Thuja.

Bell., china., kali-c.,
lach., mill., sep. sulph.,
thlasp., ust.

Psor., sulph.
Psor., as constitutional
remedy s

.. Bell., in agute attacks

occuring in Tuberculous
diseases.

When Tub. fails try

. Syphilinum,. it often

arouses reaction.


--- Page 242 ---
Valeriana

Veratrum Alb.

Zincum

AT A GLANCE

Followed by

Hydr., to fatten patient
cured with Tub.
If Tub. arouses a fearful

_ aggravation, Calc-c or

Complementary

Antidotes

~ For pain in heels

| Follows. well.

After

Complementary

Followed by

‘Inimical

247

Cale-p. in low potency

may check the effort.

°(Recorder 1925).

Asaf., Asar., croc., ign.
lic-c., spig., sulph.
Abuse of Cham. tea.
Agar., caust., sycl., led.
mang., phyt.

Am, ars., china., cup., ip.
Camph., in cholera and
cholera morbus.

(Am-c., carbo-v., bor.) in
dysmenorrhoea with
vomiting and purging.

(Hell., tub.), in incipient
brain diseases from sup-
pressed eruptions.

Ign.
Cham., nux-v.


--- Page 243 ---
Abortion .00...sssssssssssssstsssseeeeeeciseseesvessesesenseien veceeees L2D
Abscess _
Ageravation from sulph ........ _ seca vusessunsseeauasenenee sees Laces 58

~ Acute abdomen.............cesceeee “cesatieessuesesuetenneveeses 76,167

Albuminuria oo cece: eet . 106,124
Allergies ........ ccesssusceeasdaqedtteenegeeniuth vheceegeeeeeesstaeaas ee 5

_ Alternation of remedies scene . . .

Alternation of States oon ssvevessssvvvsssssveresvvssevvsseeceees VIB

amenorrhoca

Anaemia ee vee

ANIM oer

Anodyne vedesececececteeeeenenaes

Antipsoric

Antidote to Sulp-Nux-v

Apoplexy cccestsessueeesees veceestttee a eevechensessensceeeecasennassees i”
Appetite occ sscsssssstententetinn

Arthritis deformans i
‘Artificial lenses 00.0000... voestvuttvesecssecessenees coves 84
Arterial hypertension : : - 104,107
"Asthmatic affection .....0.0.00.0.cccuecielile. SenerrINnITETE M7.



--- Page 244 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

ee ee ee eee ec

Brooding ....... cuesvvsvaseeeee beens

Cancer veces teaesescetsesseeneeenepersees es “cece ceseesseeacecseecsneeses vectes
Carbuncle 0.00.00 .ccceceeeeceeeretrene ccesevseeeeeseeseceeuatertens '
Caries of spine 20s ceterettenseneeesesentensees 29
Catarralt occ teees =

Cachectics 0.0.00. ceee eee ccc eeerereeeenees

Cerebrospinal meningitis
Choking throat, warm drinks from

C0) csc: aE


--- Page 245 ---
Delirium ...000...00ccc ceueeteeeenseed : veaducuabesecenvecase 176
DepresstOn ......cccccccccteseecteeeeteenetressneetetensccttteen esveeee 196
Diabetes oo ceee ces ccosuvaseutesesatatasssasansaylilodtesesesefeeen ce 81

Diarrhoea... eee sates eeeeeeteeee 176,183 .
Diarrhoea in Phthsis «0.0.0... deslecealaveviivatasSuseseesnsereeceees 135.
Diphtheria «0.0.0.0... beccsetevecaeesereeseeeees secsiuastansstinesneeeeee 81
Dominating ........ veeseceeneeeees ceseuevieeseescsceseseeeeeceseeeeenscsterens 18t

Dressing wounds 2.0.0.2... cece cee etetateeeceeeetereeseneees 38

Eczema ........:.0+- setavcstvseessnsutsstenescsssunaranenscneneebesenenentones 177
Emaciation in children ..0.00..cc.cccecce cpeuseassaeneeses . 142

Endocarditis .....c...cecccccgscccsseecseeeseetiniesensesessnesseerseee 105
Epilepsy ...........:+- cave censaseeceesecateaneneceeseseeessdanesteeereneetenty 83
Epileptic attacks .............-. desensvec ses essthibGpa eastesteseeneeenecess 83
Epistaxis ..... csessavunsuerusnnnevesssenseeeeee “eighteen deeveesreventease: 84
Epithelioma ........... cevvavevevenitenteverseyenes Lhbeseneeiesegteeee 70,103
Erysipelas «0.0.00. seianesesastgssnsnissnevesenteteeseese 127
External application...... peceettees deeesenceseenesesnees ecceseueeecnpeceeeess 38
By. ccsssssseesesssseensseeneeen scscnsieenetientinentqietesseesetin, 84

231


--- Page 246 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING
Fatten the patient of tuberculosis ..........0.-...00cceee 133
Fever... eee bepuceeclenscceguensnesegunngecepeperteeeennnegennsnneeteecs 85
S61 (1 ESSE 86
Typhoid occccccccssesecsvsssesessssevssestestessstceevessnssssnseceeees 87,88,89
Intermittent... sceseesseseeeeeeee pevceeteeeee ceesestesvesessetestavesn 93
COnINOUS ooscsecscescecocesesseseeeeeeeeee vesueeceeeecsecussrestenss vrs 88
High £6V0r oscscescecsocssssesntsrssnessniseinngeraeieeaeeneer UT
WellOw cess ices ocecneseetetttesesseteetnsneesece ATL
Fever blisters ..........0.0.:.00+ vevuesteeeseviisiesressssieses secsneeeee 90 |
Fibroid | une 1. 98,72
fistula cece cece nee
Flatulence occccccccccsscssvsstsssvevvvesessesssvvvestessessssssevesssecee 5
PIOXION ooo cccccccsceceeesseceecnseeeeee couceeecesesgeesnstnninsesesseee 177
Forceps cccscssssssuttusastttavasasisisatistiapseeetsnnnnstsinignesseaseeveeee 123
Foreign DOdY cesscc.ccsscccescossseseesesecsseetsssnenseesnesscsnencessneaten 93
Fracture ....0.....06 cesreeeeneenteeeeretaniei veceeteevevesesessveseees 110

Gangrene oooeccecccceccceseceteecsseneeestesteseteeeneseneensseeey voaveeees

Gastric «000.000... ‘eaeeesnceee oc concaseevysunssesseratsassuusaegeeelbnteoeee
General direction’
Male Genitalia

Female Genitalia



--- Page 247 ---
CG) Coe 5 1 segesheccesesereeees LOT
Gite cceseeessessntsanetevneesectnnnesensseestsnzeseeecsee 98

Green sickness i pmenstssraniarsstuineeseseennssevenes oo 66
Grief. eee sec cecectuuenuvaneneceeciesieciocnaserecgenteaserscereensaes 66

Haematanic oo... ccc ccceceeeedeceeeseeterreetereeeeer tees Seeteceeeleeees 65
Haemoptysis ......0-.. ceceeeeceeneneceeessteeeeenenerscee 131,148
Haemorrhoids .........0...00cccececeendeceeececenerecneeeeesneeseecetinenasens 51
Haemorrhage ......sssscceeeceeeeeeee heseseseeeee 69,95,98,152,162

Haemorthagic ..........0: veceuuceauevecseccsteneetinessetseneesensncess 98

Headache ..........0-::cceee eee cauaesesseeesceecesqeareianenereress AOL
Heart ...ccccccccecccscsecesccesessesceteceeeeetereccseeenseteeneseeenee vecteteeees 103 .
Hanger oo... cece eter ceteeeeeenceeeecnnenetenntreens 178

Hypertension ......00...00 scbeseebdoeeessheceeesensaranctannacennnnettt 107

Icteroid symptoms .............--++ deeds teeneceeeen eaneasestetigersaets 89
Impaired VISION .cc-sscsssycsssecssevevssressveessseitesecstseisesseieseiiees 84
[mpotence ....-scssecsseeesssteneteestesetecete cecneenteneericees OA
Inflammation ...........cccc cesses seeuuesttisttetttsssscsceaeeet LOT
bad LG Yc) 1-2: eS eceseeeneeesee 9


--- Page 248 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

TitiS eee.

LabOUT oo... ceccccccccceeccsecseeseseeceespecseetetteteeseseresseeces L2T
Labour pains

Laughing «00.00... vseeessuescirbnecanestacesnescatecensceneanesen ti
Leucorrhoea .... arnt

Locomotor ataxia 22:0. cccccceecceeceesssetesceseeeeceeceetecsees $3,120
Loss of fluids 220.0000. cececeegcceeceteceneeeseeeteeteeeeees van 66 |
Loss of SCMEM -wicise..c.ccescecesecseeseseevsveteseseceeetecssscssseserees 66
.. 142

254


--- Page 249 ---
Malaria Suppressd. ............-... antecedecenesnatereecees veeteececeeeeees 92
Measles ...........65 dueceteeeesesseeas vesseesessvees beeeceeentees veuteeeeeeeeees 9]
Meningitis®..........8..cscsceesseneeses testes eeeseteeeseeeteccnnneeeseees LOT
menstrual irregularities ae eee eee 66

mental diseases ............ . sii
Mind oo.csccsccccccscsssserssseceereceseeessnnsscessesseasneeeeeteessnsige LEO

- Miscarriage (abortion) 0.00.0... ec cee ee ete tees 121

Muscle
Muscular fatigue ........c eee
Muttering delirzam

Nephirits ................ esspbessetersabecnsnstacsess octuseevseseseeeneseees 103
Nervous SYStCM 00.0... eee deleveeeeeceertaeeeenes 120
Nervous twitching 00.000 detente eteesneees ‘lee 120

Neuralgia ooo... cece ce eee eceeeeee eee teeters eteeetiey vee 76,102
Neurotic ...ccccccscesecceseceeceeseesecesevsesveevssvetenstesssectgeeestesseestees DOD
Nux vom if fails ......... ceneececeeeess vesauccuusetevstelenssese slevutaeeees 162


--- Page 250 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING:

Onamism 0... ee deeceeettteeseenereeres seeauueeecsceceuserersetenees
Opposite effects Leite.
Optical 2000s besten ccbereustenteeecsseernees Levees

Otitis eee beenctessenen seseenegensteeteee eee 8

Ovaritis 002 )..8 ECL oe cecencceccubesecocceseessesseseescesteaveneeseeetens 53

OXY Qed oo. i cece terete terns ctr tenseererinns 58,78
P

Paralysis .....: SoS ccavcccsececsseeesnsccctaetetenasersieeeeseeesteers ie loeee

Parturition.

Pericarditis .. . | A 103,105,109
Peritonitis .......00.2.0 fees 2 ccseuatade Lh aecieseeeee, 109,118
Phimosis .2...2.... coceeseho castes sesseestettsnesiensesseees 94
Phiegmasia ..... a “eaeeeeceuelesceensasseeeeaeterenes 106
Phthisis 02.2080 20000. ve 99, 103, 116, 128
Pleurisy ...... | | ve F716, 118
PlOuritis .00.00.ccccececeeseeeeeeeseseeeceseteeeeee beceeeeeueetteeeessenes 109
Pneumonia ............. vethesesees veeendsbeneseanene 116, 117, 118, 119,167
Post partum heamorthage “scestssesnssitsstveveceennnasasnuveessses 123
Pre-gangrenous infection ........... cesyravenessevenseteaneeeeeeen 73,149
Pregnancy .........: sessesesseeseensesesesneh | .
Prosopal gla 2.2.0... eeeeees .

Pruritus of diabetes

Prostitutes visits cccesueseuessessese

Pseudo-plethora ................ wee ei

256


--- Page 251 ---
. INDEX

Psoriasis .........2..0..... sesecestae lab sgecceestttencesteteeacerereeenesieiens
Psoric complications
Ptomaine

Pulmonary tuberculosis .........0.0.0.0::dceeceeee eee RE.

QUIS occ ect ccc eeee eee neeee ee tae cen aestaaeceenececneas 89.

Rachitis ......00.cccccccccccccceceseevieseccseeeessersneseneress Sethe

Railway Spe... ee ee
Respiratory organs «0.0.0.0. wah
Retarded menstruation

Rheumatism seetgepbevbeentinee deneceeeebebeecetanensnetenes

Ring worms ............. vasssaseeaseaeeet weveeneteeeseees Peliteseeneereceenes

Romantic love leuuuececeptectececeeeeess \ cgueesetecttevaceceeteevesecseeeees as

S
Serum Therapy .......00.cccccceceeeeceeeeeeeneeeevesseentesteeeesageaes 143
Scarlatina «20.00.0000. eee ecvunteseceeses secsseenseseebeneey 86, 143.
Sciatica oo. ec cee cece vettcseeeeeenes cecaeeeesess 76,126,179
Septic polsoning oe jeeeetceatlagenagygeet thas teateseneses

Sepia aggravation



--- Page 252 ---
BEFORE PRESCRIBING

Sleep. ......4.... veveesesees :
Sleep (to keep awake) :..
Spine... . eoieetbetteveeeeteteareensees
Spoiled c cases by Homoeopaths . eveecuetueeneedeicuedeess
Stuff neck

Stricture ............
Stupor occ ccetteeeeeeeee recess eee erences Ds
Sulph aggravation ............. cease laslecsssceselessesneatesequciterereeeees

Sun stroke ............. eceeees secgeevobevesvabisagee ceeecoveneeceneeeeeceeeeee 144

Synovitis .........;
Syphilis

T a
Taste .oooce cc cceccececeesceccestesveseeecteveapiecntrersesesesseeeeereece L44, 014 |
TeCtls ccccecccccsesssssvveseesesesseenaseesesseieseesseengtveteesnnseeeen, 130.
Teething ....... cecececetueventvadeytersceenevenes casenee Shageaee as. 130

Teeth extrastion before .......0.0..........
Tenesmus .gj5......ee vedeteusaveeveseetesssapSSHpagbeebed evess ccc. 114

Tonsillitis: seccccc----csccescseseecseesssssnseveeeseevsvseseveveneeeetteeessneeen 107
Torti collis oc... cceccccesecsescecesesescereatveevensveseanenestentes cee 109
Tuberculosis... ce. vevtrveeetinerseetereeeeben cone LL
Toxic-Santonine ....0......... vesuyeyteaen ia greecepsteeccsseeeeseedl caw. 165
Tuberculosis lymphadenitis .....0...00..0...-- eee Se 109:
-Tubesculosis 1 in the family . voeapscutesesevstieeseseseeneseseee eles 61,133


--- Page 253 ---
INDEX

Typhoid oo. ec ceeeeccceesceeeeeseeeeeecceeennieen 85,86,87,88,89
U
1 9) Cal) cE 146
Uric deposit .....0..... 51
Urine) ooo c nse e cece ee eneeee presen ene eeenensneneeeseaneeeeeees {40
UUTticaria o.oo ccceeeescescececseeueaeeneeeeseeseceeseeseetetsasecseeensesease 179
Unsocial oo. ceecee ne eciine sere r fern ne tniceeserannneeee 182
V
VURAL oe eee eee ee cere rreeeeneee ene we cctunceceeeceseesateseceees 46
Violent mania ........... fecteeeeeees ichigesscseeeqeeecaccseeuseeeeneeseseees 177
Vitality difficient im TBe ooo... cceccccccccsccce esses 134
VOM cc cceeeesesecsssssssvvesstuyrivtvitiiniviessmane 144
Weak memory ..............-. dacucececenteseeseceececeeceseteceesestaeeetes 179
Weakened power of accomodation ...............ce cee 84
Weakness ooo ccc cccccccccecssececeeeeeencecessereaseseageetecssaes 91,179
Whooping cought 0... ec eeettceee teers erereeeeneeiens 141
Wound 00... cece icc cccccccsceetecseecsteepestcnseessteeneesenneeers 110

259
