Chapter 1 ABIES CANADENSIS

INTRODUCTION

It is one of the remarkbale remedies in the treatment of chronic gastric affections and uterine disorders.

CLINICAL

Indigestion. Liver disorder. Uterine disorder.
SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS
It acts on stomach and uterus, heart, lungs. It produces catarrhal condition of stomach.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Great debility with strong desire to lie down and rest most of the time.
2) Gnawing, hungry, faint feeling at the epigastrium.
3) Great appetite, even tendency to eat far beyond the capacity for digestion.
4) Craving for meat, pickles, radishes, turnips, coarse food etc. is peculiar.
5) Chilliness is very characteristic especially when associated with peculiar cravings and prostration.
6) A remedy for uterine displacement with sore feeling at fundus of uterus relieved by pressure.

PARTICULARS
Stomach
Gastric symptoms are the most prominent Symptoms to guide us in our selection of Abies Can.
There is canine hunger which gnaws in the stomach causing, a sort of fainting feeling at the epigastrium.
The patient does not know how much he eats and very often there is excessive loading of the stomach which causes distention of stomach & abdomen with severe palpitation of heart.

Female genital Organs
Uterine prolapsus with sore feeling at fundus of uterus, relieved by pressure. Prostration; wants to lie down all the time. She thinks womb is soft & feeble.


Chapter: 2 ABIES NIGRA

INTRODUCTION
A powerful and long acting remedy, in various kinds of diseases, whenever the characteristic stomach symptoms are present.

CLINICAL
Constipation. Dyspepsia.
SPHERES OF ACTION
The most specific action of this remedy is on stomach and also on heart and lungs.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Sensation as if a hard-boiled egg had lodged in the cardiac end of stomach.
2) Pain in stomach always comes after eating.
3) Wakeful and restless at night, with hunger.
4) Dyspeptic troubles of the aged after abuse of tea or tobacco.

PARTICULARS

Gastrointestinal Symptoms:
It is a grand remedy in dyspepsia especially of the aged, habituated to excess of tea and tobacco.
They are generally low spirited and dull and have wakeful nights. The most characteristic symptom of
Abies N. is the sensation as if a hard boiled egg had lodged in the cardiac end of stomach.
The patient may describe this as a feeling as though he had swallowed some indigestible substance which had stuck in his stomach. Severe pain in stomach is felt after eating. Total loss of appetite in morning, but great craving for food at noon & night. Dyspepsia with functional heart symptoms.

Chest:
There is painful sensation, as if something were lodged in the chest and had to be coughed up. Chest cannot be fully expanded, Sharp, cutting pain in heart ; heart’s action heavy & slow, tachycardia.
Dyspnoea worse lying down. Water brash succeeds cough, worse coughing.

Relation : Compare, China, Bryo, Puls, in Lump in Stomach; also Thuja, Sabina, Nux Vom, Kali Carb



Chapter :3 ABROTANUM

INTRODUCTION

Abrotanum is a very useful medicine derived from the vegetable kingdom. The mother tincture is prepared from fresh leaves of the plant, which 
abundantly grows in Southern Europe. This is a remedy often required in cases of Marasmus in children and for Rheumatism caused by checked 
diarrhoea or other secretions. Abrotanum is one of the drugs having prominent alternating actions.

CLINICAL

Chilblains, Gout, Haemorrhoids, Hectic Fever, Hydrocele, Indigestion, Lientery, Marasmus, Pleurisy, Rheumatism, Umbilicus, Oozing from, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The chief centres of action of Abrotanum are gastro-intestinal tract, nerves, mind, fibrous tissue and serous membrane.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action on gastro-intestinal system causes disturbed digestion, defective assimilation, impaired nutrition, lientery distension of abdomen resulting in progressive emaciation and marasmus. While its action on fibrous tissue produces rheumatic and gouty manifestation, its affection on serous membrane sets in pleurisy, hydrocele etc.

CONSTITUTION

Make up of the body : The patients, usualy a child, is emaciated especially more marked in Lower Extremities old looking face; face pale and wrinkled; the skin is
flabby and hangs loose in folds; head is weak and the child cannot hold it up.

Temperature : Cruel and inhuman temperament.

Relation with heat and cold : Chilly patients.

Miasm : Psora is in the background of all the troubles.

Diathesis : Tubercular diathesis,

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Great progressive wasting, specially more in the Lower Extremities.
2. Ravenous appetite; eats well, loses flesh while living well (lod; Nat.mur; Sanic;Tub).
3. Lientery, ie. stool contains undigested food particles; alternate diarrhoea and constipation (Ant.c; Nux v; Sulph; Verat.alb; Ant. t; Podo;       Chelid).
4. Rheumatic conditions with heart irritation, epistaxis, bloody urine, anxiety and trembling. Rheumatism without swelling, but Gout with       swelling and inflammation,
   Rheumatism alternates with haemorrhoids and dysentery (Kali bich).
5. Hydrocele in children; oozing of blood and moisture from navel of new born (Cale. phos.), (of urine Hyos).
6. Angioma of the face.
7. Mind : The patient is very cruel; always wants to do something cruel; irritable and ill natured, violent and inhuman, cross and despondent;       with incapacity to think.
8. Aliments from : Suddenly checked diarrhoea or other secretions, malnutrition, defective digestion and absorption.

PARTICULARS

Marasmus :
Causation: Impaired nutrition, defective digestion and imperfect assimilation and absorption.

Character: Progressive marasmus of children, with marked emaciation of Lower Extremities.
Ascending type of emaciation. The child is very weak and is unable to hold up head; great weakness and disturbed digestion.

Concomitants : There is ravenous appetite; the child eats well, still progressive emaciation is well marked and continues to lose flesh. Along with this, there is great weakness and prostration and a kind of hectic fever.
Such children usually pass lienteric stool; suffer from alternate obstinate constipation and diarrhoea. The baby is chilly, mentally irritable and ill-natured.

In marasmus :

Abrotanum can be compared with Aethusa-eyn, lodum Natrum mur, Silicea, Calcarea phos, Tuberculinum and Sulphur which are as follows :

1.  Aethusa cyn : It is generally indicated in acute attacks of the baby caused by heat of summer, during dentition and due to intolerance of milk, The baby cannot bear   milk in any form; it is vomited out in large curds as soon as taken, Indigestion of teething children; diarrhoea and vomiting especially in hot summer weather;             followed by great weakness, prostration and sleepiness complete absence of thirst: child is unable to hold up head; incapacity to think with well marked linea-nasalis.

2.  Iodum : Iodum is the hottest baby. Baby has scrofulous and tubercular diathesis, cachectic condition, profound debility and emaciaiton of the whole body, but with hypertropy and induration of all the glands. The baby has great, Ravenous hunger, eats freely and well, yet loses flesh all the time. The baby has distended abdomen  full of gas; suffers from constipation which is relieved by drinking cold milk. Baby has croupy attack with sneezing and swaing respiration. The child grasps the larynx while coughing with fact pale and cold.

3. Natrum mur : The baby is anaemic and cachetic with great emaciation. Here too, loses flesh while living well. Emaciation is well-marked in neck and throat. The baby  craves for salt but has aversion to bread, and suffers from bad effects of salt. The baby also has great liability to take cold; is irritable and cross; weeping mood  and consolation aggravates.
4. Silicea is a chilly baby suffers from deficient and impaired nutrition, imperfect assimillation; scrofulous and rachitic child with large head, open fontanelles and  sutures; much offensive sweating about the head; always covered; distended abdomen and weak ankles; late learning to walk; late dentition; suffers from bad effects of      vaccination, especially confulsion and skin affections. Lack of vital heat. The childs obstinate, headstrong and cries when kindly spoken to. Suffers from very difficult constipation; stool partly expelled and then recedes again (Thuja). Child desires to be magnetised (Calc. carb; Phos).

5. In calcarea phos. too, the child is anaemic and emaciated, ahving scrofulous diathesis. Emaciation of the whole body. The child is unable to stand; slow in learning to     walk, with flabby but sunken abdomen; cranial bones are thin and brittle; frontanelles and sutures remain open too long or close and reopen delayed or complicated       teething; bony deformities, spine weak, disposed to curvature, unable to support body; neck is weak and therefore, unable to hold up the head.

6. Tuberculinum baby as the very name indicates, has tubercular diathesis; is physically very weak. There is emaciation of the whole body. Emaciation is very rapid and        highly pronounced; losing flesh while living well. The baby catches cold very easily without knowing how and from where. The baby usually has family history of            tubercular affection. It suits when the best selected remedies fail to relieve or permanently improve.

7. Sulphur baby is hot and psoric, having scrofulous diathesis; is emaciated and pot bellied. The baby has dirty and filthy look, weak, tall and stoop shouldered; with all    the orifices of the body red. The baby does not like to be washed or bathed. Cannot bear to stand. These type of babies may suffer from morning diarrhoea which is painless and involunary and acrid, causing redness of the anal orifice. The baby may have skin affections with itch, soreness and boils which come in crops or a single boil is succeeded by another one as soon as the first one is healed. The baby is also prone to have worm manifestations with intense craving for sweet.

Rheumatism and Gout :

Causation : Rheumatic affections are caused by suddenly checked diarrhoea or other secretions.

Character of pain :; In rheumatic affections, there is excessive pain, but there is no swelling; whereas in gout, the joints are inflammed, swollen, stiff and very painful with pricking sensation; especially ankle joints and wrists are very much inflamed and highly painful; very lame and sore all over.

Modalities :

Aggravation : At night and from cold.

Amelioration : By motion.

Concomitants : There is painful contraction of limbs from cramps or after colic. Metastatis or theumatism to heart is a frequent phenomenon. 
There is high fever during rheumatic attack Rheumatism may also alternate with heart irritation, epistaxis, bloody urine, anxiety and trembling. 
Suppressed rheumatism of any joint followed by violent cardiac symptoms call for Abrotanum.

Abrotanum can also be thought of in itching chilblains. It may also be of immense assistance in pjeurisy after. Aconite and Bryonia when a 
pressing sensation remains in affected side impeding respiration with other symptoms of pleurisy, such as evening rise of temperature, nocturnal 
sweating, great susceptibility to catch cold, etc.

General Modality :

Aggravation : At night and from cold.

Amelioration : By motion.

Relations :

Compared with Nux vomica and Agaricus in Chilblains. Bryonia and Baryta carb, follow Abrotanum well. In pleurisy, after Aconite and Bryonia, Abrotanum follows well. 



Chapter 4 ACALYPHA INDICA

INTRODUCTION

There is controversy about the first prover of this medicine. Dr. N.M. Chowdhury says that, “This remedy was first proved by Dr. P.C. Mazumder of 
Calcutta” where as Dr. S.C. Ghosh in his “Drugs of Hindoosthan” says that “Dr. C.F. Tonnere, a french homoeopath made a proving of Acalypha 
Indica and called attention to this plant as a valuable remedy”. Dr. Mahendra Lai Sirkar has also conducted the proving of this medicine through 
his disciple Babu Joy Kissen :

Ghoshal. Acalypha Indica is an infallible remedy agree for haemorrhages especially haemoptysis in our Materia Medica.

CLINICAL

Bronchiectasis. Cough. Diarrhoea. Flatulence. Haemoptysis. Incipient phthisis.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory symptoms : Acalypha Indica is employed in the beginning of phthisis associated with hard, dry and severe cough followed by bloody expectoration. Expectoration of pure bright red blood comes on in morning and dark clotted blood in the evening. Cough most violent at night. There is dullness of chest on percussion and severe pain in chest with progressive emaciation, night sweat & evening rise of temperature. It is indicated in incipient phthisis with hard, racking cough, bloody expectoration, arterial haemorrhage but no febrile disturbance.

Gastrointestinal symptoms : This medicine also has marked action on the alimentary canal characterised by burning in intestines, sensation of weight in stomach, flatulence and spluttering diarrhoea with forcible expulsion of noisy flatus. (Calc. Phos.) Rectal haemorrhage worse in the morning.
N.B. Author has releived hundreds of cases of haemoptysis when there is active, bright red bleeding from the respiratory passages (From bladder ; Erigeron, haemorrhage from piles-Mill.

Chapter 5 ACETIC ACID

INTRODUCTION

Although debility and prostration run through all the acids, these are more marked in Acetic Acid, Mur. Ac., Phos Ac. and Sulph. Ac. For cachectic condition or
anaemia or pallor or excessive wasting and dropsical condition, Acetic Acid leads the other acids of our Materia Medica. Guernsey says, “Vinegar must be
remembered as an antidote to all anaesthetic vapors— chloroform, ether etc. as well as fumes of charcoal.

CLINICAL

Anaemia. Croup. Diabetes. Diarrhoea. Dropsy. Fevers. Phthisis. Haemorrhage. Vomiting. Stomach-Cancer of. Marasmus. Corns. Warts.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

It produces a sort of anaemia with debility, loss of flesh, cough, dropsical swelling & haemorrhage.


CONSTITUTIOIN

Physical Make up : Adopted to pale, lean persons with lax, flabby muscles. Face is pale & waxy.

Heat cold relation : Sensitive to cold (Kent)

Temperament : Irritable, borrows trouble.

Diathesis :Haemorrhagic. 

Miasm :All three miasms.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Great burning thirst, insatiable even for large quantities but no thirst in fever.

2) Great prostration—after injuries, anaesthetics and surgical shock and with other complaints.

3) Haemorrhage from every mucous outlet : nose, throat, lungs, stomach, bowels and uterus.

4) Profound anaemia with waxy pallor of the face.

5) Great emaciation especially of the face, hands, & thighs (Nash)

6) Copious pale urine is characteristic particularly if accompanied by intense thirst & dry hot skin.

7) Sour belching and vomiting of pregnancy, burning water-brash and profuse salivation, day & night (Lac.Ac.-Saliva-tion agg. at night Merc.S.)

8) Cannot sleep lying on the back, sensation of sinking in abdomen causing dysponoea, rests better lying on belly (Amm.C.)

9) Hectic fever, skin dry and hot; red spot on left cheek and drenching night sweats.

10) Diarrhoea : Copious, exhausting with great thirst, in dropsy, typhus, phthisis, with night sweat.

11) Sweat : profuse, colliquative
.
12) Mind : The patient is irritable, borrows trouble, worried about business affairs. Grieves about his sickness and his children.

13) Ailments from : Bad effects of anaesthetic vapors, fumes of charcoal and gas. Bad effect of stings & bites. Injury, surgical shock, sausage poisoning.

PARTICULARS

Gastrointestinal Symptoms :

Acetic Acid is indicated in various kinds of gastrointestinal diseases; it covers even advanced stage of peptic ulcer, malignancy of stomach, intestinal tuberculosis etc. The symptoms are : sour belching an vomiting after every kind of food, burning waterbrash and profuse salivation with fermentation in stomach. There is violent burning pain in stomach and chest followed by coldness of skin and cold sweat on forehead. Cold drinks disagree but patient has intense burning thirst.

Diarrhoea:

Chronic diarrhoea of emaciated children. Diarrhoea in dropsy, typhus, phthisis, exhausting, copious, frequent watery stools worse in the morning. Diarrhoea with great thirst & night sweats.

Urinary Symptoms :

Copious pale urine is the characteristic of Acetic acid in Diabetes Mellitus if associated with intense burning thirst and dry hot skin and debility.

Dropsy : It is one of the prominent medicines for dropsy associated with diabetes and gastrointestinal diseases. With dropsical condition, there is profound anaemia with waxy pallor of the face. Dropsy with great thirst and debility, emaciation, sour belching, waterbrash and diarrhoea. Patient cannot sleep lying on back but rests better lying on belly.

Fever : Especially indicated in hectic fever with drenching night sweat. & prosiration. Skin dry and hot. There is red spot on left cheek. No thirst in fever is characteristic. There may be profuse salivation and stomach disorder with fever, Patient feels better by lying on belly.

Relations : It antidotes anaesthetic vapors. (Amyl.); fumes of charcoal and gas; Opium and Stramonium.

Cider Vinegar antidotes Carbolic acid.

Follows well : after cinchona, in haemorrhage; after Digitalis, in dropsy.

Chapter 6 ACONITUM NAPELLUS

INTRODUCTION
There are several remedies derived, proved and established from Aconite family, the most important of which is Aconitum Napellus. Aconite is one of the deadliest and most rapidly acting poison; yet, through Hahnemann’s discoveries, it has been transformed into one of the best of the nurseries. It is one of Clarke’s A, B, C, Nurseries, others being Belladonna and Chamomilla. Aconite causes Turmoil in circulation, belladonna causes Turmoil in brain and Chamomilla causes Turmoil in temperament.
Had it not been for the wonderful curative power which Master Hahnemann found and developed from this wild poisonous plant, we would have been lagging behind and missed lot in the effective treatment of many acute diseases in their initial stage. Aconite is a short and’quick acting superficial remedy for acute and most distressing conditions. Aconite is like a great storm; it comes Suddenly and violently, sweeps over and passes away in the same manner. With the action of the remedy, the storm is over. And in this powerful drug, we find a ready solution to many of our staring problems encountered when dealing with many diseases, provided they are in the initial stage and the symptoms corroborate.

CLINICAL

In the initial stage of any acute diseases such as Apoplexy, Asthma, Chest affection, Chicken-pox, Cholera, Convulsion, Epilepsy, Croup., Cough, Diarrhoea, Dropsy,
Dysentery, Amenorrhoea, Dysmenorrhoea, Bad effects of fear & fright, Fever, Headache, Heart affections, Inflammation, Menses, Pneumonia, Suppression of urine, Vertigo,etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Perhaps there may not be any organ, tissue or system in the body which is not susceptible to the action of this remedy. Still it predominently acts on cerebro-spinal
nervous system, brain, serous and mucous membrane, blood, cardio-vascular system, etc.

PATHOGENESIS

Aconite causes “Turmoil in circulation.” It is capable of irritating brain and cerbro-spinal nervous system producing exalted activity on the circulation, paralysing the capillaries, resulting in tension and congestion with tendency towards inflammation. The genius of this highly useful remedy is through mental sphere and it is always important to consider the mental symptoms. Its action on heart retards the intensity of its function.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up : Since Aconite is purely an acute drug, consideration of constitution is not of much importance. However, it is indicated in acute cases occurring in plethoric sanguine persons with rigid fibres, dark hair and eyes, full of plethoric habits who lead a sedentary life and who are most in need of Aconite are strong, robust people. Aconite is the remedy of the rosy, chubby and plethoric babies.

Temperament : Sanguine temperament.

Relation with heat arid cold : No definite stamping can be made in this respect. Still Aconite seems to be a ‘warm blooded’ patient.
Miasm : Psora is the miasm in the back-ground.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. “Tension” is the key-note of Aconite (Key-note of Belladonna is congestion). Due to irritation of the mind and affection of circulation, tension always prevails Aconite      patients

2  .Aconite is indicated in the first stage of any acute case which starts suddenly and violently like a storm.

3. It is one of the Trios of restlessness (others being Arsenic and Rhus tox.). The patient is very much restless. Cannot remain in one place. He is full of energy, vigor     and strength; as such, moves frequently from place to place. (Aconite patient moves quite frequently because physically he is very strong and he can move about, but in     Arsenic the patient is too weak to move although he wants.)

4. There is great fear and anxiety of mind : intense nervousness. The very face of Aconite expresses FEAR and this remedy is curative of ailments from fright, mental or       physical. The patient tosses about in agony; life is rendered miserable by fear.

5. Fear and fright are the most characteristic manifestations of Aconite—fear of death even predicts the time of death. (In Arsenic patients too, there is fear of death.      He feels that the disease is fatal and he is surely going to die. But the difference is that Arsenic patient does not predict the time of death and he feels that the.      disease in incurable and fatal. Therefore, there is no use of taking any medicine; hence no doctor is to be called. The Aconite patient thinks that unless proper  is       taken, he is going to die and, therefore, wants the doctor to be called immediately.)

6. Dry and hot skin with rare sweat (Nash). (Where there is sweat it is only on the parts rested upon—Boericke).

7. According to Nash, Aconite is one of the greatest pain remedies. His Trios of pain remedies are Aconite, Chamomilla and Coffea. Aconite screams with pain, pains are.       intolerable, they drive him crazy; he becomes very restless at night. The pain is often associated with numbness (Platina, Chamomilla).

8. Excessive sensitiveness to the least touch.

9. Unquenchable thirst for large quantity of cold water. There is active haemorrhage from any part of the body, both internal and external, uterus or other places in stout plethoric patients. The character of the blood is pure, and bright red accompanied by fear of death and nervous excitability. The face of Aconite patient is red or red and pale alternately. Anxious and frightened pxpression. Sensation of face growing or swelling. On rising, the red face becomes deathly pale and he feels dizzy.

Aggravation : In the evening and especially at night.

Amelioration : By uncovering and in the OPEN AIR.

Aconite is the drug for the congestive stage of inflammation before localisation takes place. Paralysis from exposure to dry cold wind (Caust).

Mind : Aconite patients have peculiar mental’symptoms which are as follows :

There is great fear and anxiety of mind, with great nervous , excitability, which run through the whole drug. The very face of Aconite patient expresses the fear.

The Aconite patient has fear of death, in any acute disease; fear of darkness, fear of bed, fear of ghost, fear of going out. Fear to go into a crowd where there is any excitement or many people. Fear to cross street, fear to cross a bridge, fear of death in pregnancy. There are numerous remedies having fear of death, but the peculiarity of Aconite is clairvoyance i.e. the patient predicts the date and even the hour of death. If a clock is in the patient’s room, he will say that when the hands reach a particular point, he will be nothing but a corpse. This symptom is very striking and peculiar to Aconite only. It is the Aconite patient who calls his friends around him and takes leave of them. Such a mental state occurring in the course of any illness calls for Aconite only.


The patient seems to have been threatened with sudden, violent death but recovery is also very quick like a great storm, only to be quiet very soon.
The patient is very much restless and he does everything in great haste; must change position quite often; everything startles him. The Aconite patient tosses about in agony and his life is rendered. miserable.



Music is unbearable for Aconite patient; it makes her sad (Sabina; Thuja, Graphites, Natrum sulph., Natrum carb.).
This mental anxiety, worry and fear accompany most of the trivial ailments. Almost certainly this remedy should never be given in case where the sickness is borne
with patience and calmness. Mental calmness contra-indicates Aconite. If Aconite is to be thought of, there must be mental uneasiness, worry, anxiety and fear  accompanying the most trifling ailments. Intense and uncontrollable anguish, anxiety and great fear are characteristic symptoms.
Hahnemann says. “Whenever Aconite is chosen homoeopathically, you must, above all, observe the moral symptoms and be careful that it closely resembles them, the anguish of mind and body; the restlessness; the disquiet not to be allayed.”

16. Ailments from. Exposure to dry cold air, dry North or West wind, or exposure draught of cold air, while in perspiration; bad effects of checked perspiration, fear, fright, shock, heat of sun, excitement, injury, surgical operation, etc.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation : Exposure to dry cold air, exposure to draught of cold air, while in perspiration, bad effects of checked perspiration, fear, fright, shock, heat of sun, excitement, etc.
Location : Intense pain is felt in the frontal region or semi-laterally.
Sensation : Headache as if nailed up; drives him crazy; fullness and heaviness in forehead, as if the skull would be forced out through the forehead. Burning headache as if the brain were agitated by boiling water. Sensation of fulness and throbbing in the head.

Modalities :
Aggravation: Towards the evening and at night, when going to bed. Pains are worse in a warm room and when lying on affected side,

Ameliorafion : In the open air.
Concomitants: Fear of death, anxiety, worry, mental uneasiness and restlessness.

Cough :
Causation : Cough may be caused due to exposure to dry cold air, dry North or West wind, or exposure to draught of cold air; checked perspiration, etc. The cough may.come along with fever or cough itself may start violently.

Character of cough : It is sudden and violent. It may be croupy in nature. Cough is dry, hoarse, suffocating, loud, rough, croaking, hard, ringing and whistling.

Modalities :
Aggravation : On expiration, towards evening and at night.
Amelioration: In the open air.
Dysentery :
Causation: Fear, fright, shock, heat of sun, or® excitement.
Mode of onset : Sudden and violent.
Character of stool : There is sudden agonising pain in the abdomen. Severe tenesmus and
gripping colicky pain. Frequent stool, stool contains undigested food particles, mucus and bright red
blood; frequent desire to defaecate.

Modalities : Attack severe and more towards evening and at night.
Concomitants : There is. intense nervous restless.ness, fear, anxiety and anguish. The patient tosses
about in agony. He thinks the attack is fatal and he is going to die.

Collapse :
Causation ; Just as in dysentery, cholera may also set in due to fear, fright, shock, heat of sun, or any excitement.
Mode of onset : The onset is sudden and violent. 
Character : There is severe vomiting and purging of profuse quantity. Gripping and cutting pain in abdomen. Frequent desire for stool and vomiting.

Modalities :
Aggravation : Towards evening and at night.
Amelioration : In open air.

Concomitants : There is severe Precordial pain, intense nervous restlessness, fear, anxiety and anguish. The patient tosses about in agony. He thinks the attack is fatal and he is going to die soon.

Convulsion : Generally teething children may get the attack of convulsion which will be relieved by Aconite Character of convulsion: There is jerking and twitching of single muscle (Agaricus, Zincum met.). The child gnaws its fist, bites, frets and screams. The skin may be very hot and’dry, with high fever and
dilated pupils.

Menses :
There may be amenorrhoea or suppression of menses in young plethoric girls usually after fright. fear or exposure to cold, etc.

Fever:
Aconite is a great fever remedy. Causation : Exposure to dry cold air, dry North or West wind or exposure to draught of cold air,
while in perspiration, bad effects of checked perspiration, fear, fright, shock, heat of sun and excitement.
Mode of onset : Starts very suddenly and violently.

Symptoms of fever : There is sudden and violent attack of fever with high rise of temperature. Severe chill in the beginning, violent and more chill in the evening and at night. Very chilly if uncovered, but with internal heat. The acute fever is generally of short and sharp attack.

There is no periodicity whatsoever. The most violent attack of fever, requiring Aconite will subside in a night, no other drug is needed. Aconite should never be given simply to control the fever, never be alternated with other drug for that purpose.
Face during fever : Face is red or pale and red alternately. Anxious and frightened expression. Sensation of face growing or swelling, On rising the red face becomes deathly pale and he feels dizzy.

Skin during fever : Skin is dry and hot with burning sensation. Skin is red, shining, not with violent pain.
Sweat in fever : There is drenching sweat, especially on parts laid on, which relieves (Boericke) (Natrum mur., Psorinum).
Thirst during fever : Especially during the heat state, the patient is very much thirsty. There is burning thirst for large quantity of cold water.
Mental symptoms during fever : The patient is very much anxious.. There is intense nervousness and restlessness. He tosses about in agony. The face is expressive of fear, fear of death and even predicts the time of death.

Becomes intolerable towards the evening and on going to bed. The patient thinks that he will definitely die soon and the fever is so severe that it will be fatal to him unless treated immediately.

Modalities:
Aggravation : Towards the evening and at night and in a warm room.
Amelioration : In open air and by prespiration.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : Evening and at night, pains are unsuportable; in a warm room; when rising from bed; lying on painful or affected side.
Amelioration: In open air.

Relations :
Aconite is complementary to Coffea in fever, sleeplessness and intolerance of pain; to Amica in traumatism; to Sulphur in all cases, Rarely indicated in fevers which bring out eruptions.
Aconite is the acute of Sulphur and both precede and follow in acute inflammatory conditions. In Aphonia, when Acon., Phos., Spongia fail, Cina should be thought of.
Antidotes : Bell., Cham., Coffea, Nux v., Sepia, Spongia, Sulph.
Antidoted by: Acet. acid., Alcohol.

Chapter 7 ACTAEA RACEMOSA (CIMICIFUGA)

INTRODUCTION

Some confusions may arise in the minds of the students due to different names applied to this remedy and, therefore, appearing in different parts of Materia Medica. It was Hughes who preferred it to be called by its Linnaean-name Actaea. Others who supported him rank from Hering, Clarke, Allen, Genius Kent and Guernsey, whereas it was Nash, Boericke, Roger and Stanels, in opposition who named it as Cimicifuga. Hughe’s Pharmacodynamic reveals its nick-name. “The Homoeopathic milk for the Allopathic Babes” for his Object was, evidently to reconcile Homoeopathy or at least.make it acceptable to the members of the orthodox school of medicine.

CLINICAL
Abortion tendency to, Breast affections, Chest affections, Disorders of Pregnancy, Puerperal mania, Headache, Heart affection, Labour, Menstrual disorders, Rheumatism, Vomiting of pregnancy, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Acts especially upon the entire nervous system and female generative organs. As far as the nervous system is concerned, it acts especially on the cerebro-spinal nerves and
especially on the motor nerves as well as upon the uterus, ovaries and joints.


PATHOGENESIS
It disturbs the nerve centres and produces irritation. It also increases arterial tension,

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: There is no particular look of the patient. 

Temperament: Hysterical temperament. 

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient. Miasm; Psora is in the background. 

Diathesis: Rheumatic and gouty diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. All the symptoms are WORSE DURING MENSES: more profuse the flow, greater the sufferings.

2. Chilly Patients, easily affected by cold, sensitive to cold and relieved by warmth.

3. Muscular soreness, a bruised feeling all over the body.

4. Pain is like electric shock here and there, sharp, lancinating, in various parts; chest and uterine region, shoots from side to side.

5. Mind. This remedy is full of mental symptoms. Fear, anguish and restlessness are well marked.There is fear of death with great suspicion.
The Actaea racemosa patient has got mania which occurs in nervous hysterical women; puerperal mania; thinks she is going to be crazy; tries to injure herself. Sensation as of a heavy, black cloud had settled all over her and enveloped her head so that everything is in darkness and confusion; as if some weight is laid upon the head. There is illusion of a mouse running under her chair She is sad, melanholic, gloomy and low spirited. She is bowed dawn with sorrow and sits and mops in great sadness. Hysterical girls in a state, of sadness and she will sit and say nothing. When questioned, she will break into tears or express in various ways the overwhelming sadness, with chorea and epileptic fit as a reflex symptom from uterine diseases. There is also changeable mood; physical and mental symptoms are all the time changing. The mental state following disappearance of rheumatism i is a strong feature. The Theumatism get gets better, but the mental state becomes worse. All the mental ‘symptoms change proportionately, worse during menstruation and compared to the amount of menstrual flow; more profuse the flow, greater the mental distress. 

6. Ailments from : Anxiety, fright, disappointed love, business failure, over-exertion, child bearing, etc.

PARTICULARS
Headache :
Causation: From cold, damp wet weather. The headache is also of rheumatic origin.

Sensation: Sore, bruised feeling all over the head; bruised sensation in the occiput; sore, bruised feeling on the top of head, as if top of the head would fly off.

Character; Shooting and throbbing pains in the head from reflex symptoms of uterus. Brain feels too large with waving sensation or opening and shutting sensation in the head. Pains as if pressing outward. Pressing type of headache with soreness in the back of neck.With headache, the eye balls are very sore; feels pain if he turns head to any direction with ciliary neuralgia, aching or sharp, darting, shooting pain in the globes extending” to the temples, vertex and occiput.

Modalities:
Aggravation: From going upstairs; during menses; weather changes; cold damp weather.

Amelioration: By lying down.

Menses :

Delayed menses by mental emotion, from cold.
Time: Irregular and delayed.

Quantity: Profuse, scanty or suppressed.

Character of blood: coagulated, and very much offensive.

Modality:

Aggravation of pain during the flow; more the flow, greater the pain.

Concomitants: There is severe pain all through the period of flow; pain in ovarian region, across pelvis, from hip to hip with great sensitiveness. With menses, there may also be chorea, hysteria or mania with more rheumatic pains and palpitation of heart.

Pregnancy :
During pregnancy, there is nausea all the time with sleeplessness and sharp pain across the abdomen from hip to hip; abortion, especially at the third month. When given during later months of pregnancy, it shortens labour if symptoms correspond. In ladies who. have previously borne only dead children, from no discoverable cause. Actaea should be given in daily dose of potency for 2 months before term.

Labour :
False labour like pain, which is sharp and lancinating, electric like pains in various parts from uterine irritation, in uterine region from side to side. Shivering in the first stage of labour-irregular type of pain during labour with rigid os. No dilatation. Pain severe, spasmodic, difficult. Aggravation from least noise.

Prolapse :
Severe pain in the uterine region, darting from side to side, sharp, lancinating, electric like pain. Bearing down sensation with relaxation of the parts. Bearing down sensation is accompanied with other general symptoms.

Heart :

Irregular action of the heart with fluttering and quick pulse. Sensation as if heart is enlarged with sore feeling in the region of heart. Heart’s action ceases suddenly with impending suffocation and palpitation.

Modality:
Aggravation: From least motion and during menses.

Concomitant: Heart troubles are from reflex symptoms of uterus and ovaries.

Rheumatism: Being one of the good remedies for muscular rheumatism, it especially affects the bellies of muscles of neck and back. The joints commonly affected are those of lumbo-sacral region and big joints.

Sensation: Excessive muscular soreness is felt. There is uneasiness, restlessness, aching in the limbs with pain in lumbar and sacral region down thigh. There is stiffness, lameness, contracted feeling with stitching and cramping pain.

Modality:

Aggravation: From using arms in sewing, type writing, piano-playing, from cold, damp weather and during menses.

Concomitant; Rheumatism alternates with mental symptoms.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: From, cold, during menses. More severe the flow, greater the suffering 

Amelioration: From warmth.

Relations :
Similar to Caulophyllum and Pulsatilla in uterine affections.



Chapter 8 

ACTAEA SPICATA



INTRODUCTION
This is a rheumatic & gouty remedy and it has special affinity for smaller joints. It is especially suited to old people. 
CLINICAL :
Rheumatism.
PARTICULARS
Rheumatism :
This remedy has special affinity for smaller joints, particularly the wrist. The joints start aching and swelling after a slight exercise. Affected joints are swollen in
affected limb great weakness is felt as if paralysed. There is extreme tenderness to touch, weakness & tingling. The right arm and right wrist are specially affected.
Pains are of a violent, tearing, drawing character & are worse by touch or movement. Pains of this kind running from decayed tooth to temples.

Modality : Aggravation— at night, motion and change of weather, fatigue.

Chapter 9 ADONIS VERNALIS

Pheasant's Eye Ranunculaceae

CLINICAL :

Albuminuria. Dropsy. Heart—affections of Like Convallaria and Digitatis, Adonis is a famous heart remedy. It is reputed to be helpful in cases of endocarditis, valvulitis, myocarditis, cardiac asthma and cardiac dropsy and other heart affections after rheumatism or influenza or renal diseases. The symptoms are, rapid and feeble action of heart, dropsy, irregular and intermittent pulse, oedema of the legs, ascites and dyspnoea.
This drug has not been proved in its potency.

Heart

Mitral and aortic regurgitation, Chronic aortitis. Fatty heart pericarditis. Rheumatic Endocarditis. Precordial pain, palpitation and dyspnoea. Marked venous engorgement. Cardiac asthma. Fatty heart. Myocarditis, irregular cardiac action, constriction and vertigo, Pulse rapid, irregular. Low vitality with weak heart and slow, weak pulse.
(Boericke)

Chapter 10 AESCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM

INTRODUCTION

Hale writes of Aesculus, “A veritable polychrest having a wide range of action, but like some other polychrests it has a central point of action from which radiates a series of reflex symptoms. This central point of action is the liver and portal system and nine out of every ten of its symptoms are due to this action.” It is one of our great haemorhoidal remedies.

CLINICAL :

Backache. Constipation. Coryza. Haemorrhoids. Liver-affection of Uterine—affection of.
SPHERES OF ACTION :
It appears to have a marked influence on the venous especially portal system, liver and lumbo-sacral articulation.
Mucous membranes of mouth, throat, rectum also come under the domain of this remedy.

Pathogenesis : It produces many symptoms of disordered liver resulting engorged hemorrhoidal veins. Due to congestion of veins sense of fullness, dryness, heat & pain are produced.

Constitution : It is suitable to persons having haemorrhoidal tendencies and who suffer with gastric, bilioiis or catarrhal troubles. It is an antipsoric medicine.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Severe dull backache in lumbo-sacral articulation; more or less constant, affecting sacrum & hips is the greatest concomitant symptom.
2) Sensation of fullness in various parts such as heart, lungs, stomach, anus, brain, pelvis ete.
3) Piles-purple, painful, burning, blind, rarely bleeding.
4) Stool followed by fullness of rectum and intense pain in anus for hours 
5) Frequent inclination to swallow, with burning, pricking stinging and dry constricted faces 
6) Thin, watery burning coryza with characteristic rawness & sensitiveness to cold air. 
7) Back “gives out” during pregnancy, prolapsus and leucorrhoea.
8) Mind : Aesculus hip. patients are, as a rule despondent gloomy and irritable. They lose temper easily and gain control slowly and are also miserably cross.

PARTICULARS

Nose:

Mucous membrance is dry, swollen. Inspired air feels cold & nasal passages are sensitive to cold air. Sneezing, followed by severe coryza with thin watery burning discharge and sensation of rawness.
Modality : Aggravation : Cold air, after washing.
Throat:

A medicine for follicular pharyngitis where dry-ness, roughness, rawness & sensitiveness to inspired air are characteristic symptoms. There is also violent burning like fire on swallowing. Frequent inclination to swallow, with burning, pricking, stinging and dry constricted fauces. Patient hawks ropy mucus of sweetish taste.

Backache :
Location-Aesculus Hip. has special affinity for lumbo-sacral articulation. Severe dull backache in lumbosacral articulation which is more or less constant. There is sensation of heaviness and lameness in back.

Modality: | Aggravation—Motion, walking, stooping Concomitant :Backache associated with constipation, piles, prolapsus uteri, leucorrhoea.

Rectal Symptoms :

Constipation :

Stool is large dry, hard & difficult to pass. Stool followed by fullness of rectum and intense pain in anus for hours. There is dryness and heat of rectum. Constipation with severe lumbosacral backache.
Haemorrhoids :
Haemorrhoids blind, painful burning & purplish, rarely bleeding. Rectum sore with fulness, burning and itching. Dryness & heat of rectum, with sensation as if rectum is full of small sticks. Knife- like pains shoot up the rectum,

Relations :
Similar: To Aloe., Coll., Ign., Mur.ac., Nux., Sulph,, in haemorrhoids. After collinsonia has improved piles, Aesc. often cures.

Useful after Nux and Sulph. have improved, but failed to cure piles.


Chapter 11 AETHUSA CYNAPIUM

INTRODUCTION

AEthusa Cynapium is one of the best remedies for the vomiting in children especially during dentition and in hot summer weather due to intolerance of milk. It is a thirst remedy and is most important for Cholera infantum and also for Epilepsy in babies.

CLINICAL
Brain fag, Cholera infantum, Convulsion, Cough, Delirium, Dyspepsia, Epilepsy, Headache, Hiccough, Idiocy, Infantile paralysis, Intolerance of milk, Disorders of
stomach, Vomiting, etc.
SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on nervous system, glandular system, mucous membrane and skin. PATHOGENESIS It is a frightful poison having narcotic properties as well as paralysing effects. The principal use we make of the drug arises from its action on the stomach.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Features expressive of pain and anxiety. Herpetic eruption on end of the nose. Sunkenness in the face with marked linea nasalis. Physically the child is so weak that he is unable to stand or hold up the head.

Temperament: Mentally the patient is idiotic, confused and unable ito think. Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient.
Miasm: It touches all the 3 miasms in acute state. 

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
The characteristic, uncommon and peculiar symptoms by which one can make selection of this remedy homoeopathically by individualising a patient are:

1. Intolerance of milk in any form-e.g. mother’s milk, cow’s milk, bottled and tinned milk. It is vomited in large curds and after vomiting weakness causes drowsiness.

2. Indigestion of teething children. Vomiting is violent, sudden, of frothy milk-white substance or yellow fluid followed by CURDLED MILK AND CHEESY MATTER.

3. Regurgitation of food an hour or so after eating. Greenish copious vomiting followed by weakness and prostration with sleepiness.

4, Complete absence of thirst is very striking in Aethusa.

5. Physically great weakness; the child can neither stand nor hold up the head. Prostration with sleepiness is well marked.
6. An expression of great anxiety and pain; sunkenness in the face with well marked LINEA NASALIS. This well marked linea nasalis symptom is more characteristic of AEthusa    than of any other remedy.

7. Mentally the patient is idiotic ; incapacious to think and is very much confused.

8. Epileptic spasms with clenched thumbs, red face, fixed and dilated pupils, mouth filled with foam; locked jaws with small, hard and quick pulse. And most    peculiar symptom is, EYES ARE TURNED DOWNWARDS instead of upwards or sidewise.

9. Herpetic eruptions on the end of the nose.

10. Mind : Patient imagines that he sees rat or mouse running across the room. Idiocy with incapacity of thinking anything and confused. The features expressive of             much pain and anxiety, are found on face with a drawn condition and well marked linea nasalis. AEthusa is a wonderful medicine for ‘EXAMINATION FUNK (Arg. nit., Gels).

11. Aliments from : During period of dentition, hot summer weather, milk or milk in any form, errors of diet and bad hygienic surroundings.

PARTICULARS

AEthusa Baby :

One can take the help of AEthusa cynapium as one of the best remedies for vomiting in babies, cholera infantum and epilepsy of children. The troubles occur normally during dentition in hot summer weather, in children who CANNOT TOLERATE MILK IN ANY FORM. The baby is very weak, cannot stand up or hold the head up; weakness and prostration with sleepiness persist throughout. The child is confused, idiotic, and has incapacity to think. The features are expressive of much pain and anxiety, with a drawn condition and well marked linea nasalis and herpetic eruption on the end of the nose.

Vomiting :
Causation: Period of dentition, hot summer weather, milk or milk in any form. Baby CANNOT TOLERATE MILK OR MILK IN ANY FORM. It is vomited out in large quantities like very sour curd in one great effort as soon as it is swallowed, after which the baby becomes greatly relaxed and drowsy. During dentition, in hot summer weather and due to indigestion, the baby vomits violently and suddenly of a frothy milky white substance or yellow fluid followed by curdled milk and cheesy matter.

Calcarea os :
Also has got the symptom of sour vomiting of large curds but the symptoms differentiating it from AEthusa are:
(1) Leucophlegmatic temperament of Calcarea.
(2) Sour stool, sour vomiting and sour sweat.
(3) Sweaty head with open fontanelles.
Regurgitation of food an hour or so after eating is also a recorded symptom of AEthusa. Vomiting is copious and greenish.
After vomiting, weakness and prostration with sleepiness is found in AEthusa.
Mentally the baby is idiotic and physically so weak as to unable to stand and hold up head.
Features expressive of pain and anxiety are present on face. Prostration with sleepiness is well-marked in AEthusa compared to Calcarea os. or carb.

Cholera Infantum : (Summer diarrhoea or Infantile Cholera).

If the milk drunk by the baby stays in the stomach for a long time, it is vomited out finally as very sour curds, so large in quantity that it would seem almost impossible that the baby could have ejected them. This condition of stomach when worse, turns into Cholera infantum. This is due to acute catarrhal inflammation of the stomach and intestine with irritation of sympathetic ganglia.

Causation: High temperature of summer, errors of diet, dentition and bad hygienic surroundings.

Character: The onset is sudden and the child lies stretched out in an unconscious condition, with fixed and dilated pupils and eyes turned downwards. Sunken face and well marked linea nasalis. Great INTOLERANCE OF MILK. It is vomited out in large sour curds. After vomiting, the baby falls down completely prostrated and exhausted. Violent.sudden vomiting of frothy white substance resembling milk. Vomiting is green and copious. The child can retain nothing in its stomach. At every commencement of an attack, there is great exhaustion and rapid wasting of the tissues.

Stool: Greenish, liquid, slimy and undigested, profuse with green mucus.
During and before stool, there is colic and convulsion. After stool, weakness and prostration with sleepiness are well-marked.
In the last stage symptoms of collapse supervene.
Modality: Worse in the morning.
For cure of Cholera infantum, sometimes AEthusa should be followed by an anti-psoric remedy like Psorinum or Sulphur. The attack may last from a few hours to severalweeks.

Convulsion or Epilepsy :
AEthusa has got peculiar symptoms of epileptic convulsion. EYES ARE TURNED DOWNWARDS instead of upwards or side wise. If the condition is worse, there is sunkenness on the face with well
marked linea nasalis. This symptom leads to AEthusa more than to any other remedy. Spasm with clenched thumbs red face, fixed and dilated pupils, locked jaws and foam in the mouth are among the very marked symptoms of AEthusa. Pulse is small, quick and hard. After spasm, weakness and
Prostration with sleepiness occur.
General Modalities :
Aggravation : All complaints are worse after eating or drinking, hot summer weather, milk or milk in any form, after vorniting, after stool, after spasm during the period of dentition, 3 a.m. to 4 a.m. and in the evening.
Amelioration : All complaints are better by covering, open fresh air, seashore, rest, company and tight bandage on head.
Relations :
Similar to: Antim. crud., Arsenic., Calcarea carb.
Complementary to: Calcarea carb.
Antidoted by: Vegetable acids.
It antidotes: Opium, Aconite in inflammatory conditions.

Chapter 12 AGARICUS MUSCARIUS

INTRODUCTION
Agaricus muscarius is a gift of vegetable kingdom. It is very much suited to nervous affections of old people, drunkards who often become delirious and get epileptiform fit. Agaricus finds a respectable place in the Materia Medica as an excellent remedy for neruous affections.

CLINICAL
Bad effects of alcohol Chilblains, Chorea, Delirium, Debauch, Epilepsy, Enteric Fever, Gangrene, Headache, Itching, Lumbago, Prolapse, Rheumatism, Skin affections, Sexual excess, Suppressed eruption, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It energetically acts upon nerves, mind, brain, circulation, skin and mucous membrane.

PATHOGENESIS
It irritates nerves and brain producing various delirious conditions, epileptiform fit and exaggeration of nervous functions other reflex symptoms.

Constitution :
It is best adapted to old people with weak indolent circulation, light hair, lax skin and muscles.
Temperament: Nervous temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.
Miasm: Psora and Syphilis are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Delirium with constant raving.
2. Involuntary movements while awake; spasmodic motion and chorea.
3. Uncertainty in walking; stumbles over everything on the way.
4. Twitching and trembling run through the whole remedy,
5. Great sensitiveness of the entire body.
6. Chilblains and frostbite, with itching and redness and burning intolerably.
7. Complaints appear diagonally: Upper left arm and lower right leg (Anac., Arn,, Kalic., Led., R.tox., Thuja). Upper right arm and lower left leg (Ambra, Caust,, Lyco.,     Medo., Phos., Sulp.ac.).
8. Pain as if ice touched or pierced by needles of ice, is very characteristic.
9. Violent bearing down pain in females.
10. Ailments from : Indolent circulation, bad effects of alcohol, debauch, sexual excess,
suppressed eruption.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache may be caused by defective circulation, alcohol or sexual excess.

Character of headache: Headache of those readily become delirious in fever or with pain; of persons subject to chorea; twitching or grimaces; from spinal affection.
Modality: Aggravation from exposure to cold air, before a thunderstorm, after coition or alcoholism.
Concomitants: Delirium; twitching and jerking; especially while awake.

Convulsion and delirium :

Causation: Of drunkards, bad effects of sexual excess, debauch or suppressed eruption.

Character of delirium: With constant raving. The patient tries to. get out of bed and escape, generally in typhoid. Twitching and trembling and jerking of the whole body with chorea. Involuntary movements while awake, ceases during sleep; chorea of single muscle to the dancing of the whole body. There may be spinal irritation due to sexual excess. Nervous prostration after sexual debauch. Every motion and turn of the body causes pain in the spine. There is uncertainty in, walking; stumbles over everything on the way. Feels pains as if beaten. A peculiarity of the delirium is tendency to make verses and prophecy and incoherent talks; it gives the nearest approach to paralysis; exalted notions of grandeur and power, followed by depression, confusion and imbecility.


Concomitants: There may be headache along with or consequent upon this attack. The whole body is very painful and sensitive to touch. Extreme sensitiveness to cold air.
Skin :

Causation: Exposure to cold; snow-bite
.
Sensarion: Chilblains with itching, redness and burning. Frostbite and all cosequences thereof.

Sensation as if ice touched or ice cold needles were piercing the skin or as from hot needles.

Burning, itching and redness of various parts; ears, nose, face, hands and feet. The affected parts are red, hot and swollen.

Feels pain all over the body. Spine is very sensitive to touch. Pain is sore, aching, especially in lumbar and sacral region, during exertion, in daytime and while sitting. Single vertebra is very sensitive to touch. Extremely sensitive to cold air.

Modality: Aggravation when standing and in cold air.

Prolapse : Especially in post-climacteric period, there is bearing down sensation, with severe intolerable pain.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: After eating, after coitus, cold air, mental application, before thunderstorm.

Amelioration: In open air and warm application.

Relations :
Similar to Calcarea, Cantharides, Hyos.; Lachesis, Nux vomica and Stramonium, in delirium of alcoholism arid to Zincum in chorea.

Antidoted by : Charcoal; Coffea, Camphor.

Follows well : Bell., Caic., Merc., Op., Puls., Rhust., Sil.

Followed well by: Tarent.


Chapter 13 AGNUS CASTUS

INTRODUCTION
Agnus Castus was used in early days by both men & women to suppress the sexual desire and hence homoeopathically it becomes a medicine for sexual weakness with no desire & power. It belongs to the same category as Selenium, Staphysagria and Acid Phos, although properly speaking it typifies a condition more desperate than that presented by any one of those remedies.

CLINICAL :

Agalactia, Impotency. Leucorrhoea. Sterility. Gonorrhoea—secondary. Sprains.
Spheres of Action & Pathogenesis : Agnus produces its chief effect on sexual organs of both the sexes. It lowers sexual vitality, with corresponding mental depression and loss of nervous energy.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS : 
1) Prematurely old age-from abuse of the sexual powers.

2) Complete impotence with relaxation, flaccidity, coldness of genitalia. No sexual power or desire.

3) Impotency after repeated attacks of gonorrhoea.

4) Deficient secretion or suppression of milk in nursing women 

5) Leucorrhoea transparent but Draining linen yellow; passes imperceptibly from the Very relaxed parts.

6) Mind : Absent minded. Unable to recollect things. He has to read a sentence twice before he can comprehend. He becomes melancholic apathetic, distracted from
abuse of sexual powers. Illusions of smells, herrings, musk. There is great sadness with a fixed idea of approaching death. This fear is not of immediate death as with
Aconite, but the patient thinks it is sure to come after a while, and there is no use in doing anything, Nervous debility in unmarried persons. Tachycardia caused by
tobacco in neurotic young men, 

7) Ailments from—Sexual excesses. Repeated attacks of gonorrhoea or gleet. Sprains or Overlifting.
PARTICULARS

Male sexual Organs :

It has more marked action on male sexual organs than female sexual organs. Agnus should be thought of when the sexual life is entirely annihilated due to abuses & excesses of former years and due to repeated attacks of gonorrhoea in the past. The patient becomes a complete impotent with relaxation, coldness, flaccidity of the genitalia. There is no sexual power and desire, even voluptuous fancies excite no erection. It is also medicine for secondary gonorrhoea. Gleety discharge with absence of sexual desire & erections. Testes cold, swollen, hard & painful.

Female sexual Organs :

Breast symptoms : Agalactia—There is deficient secretion or suppression of milk in nursing women (Asaf., Lac. Can., Lac. Defl.} This condition is often associated with great sadness & an idea of approaching death.

Leucorrhoea : There is transparent, imperceptible discharge from the very relaxed parts which stains the linen yellow.

Sterility : This remedy is very good for sterility if a woman had indulged extensively in secrete vice. She has no sexual desire, aversion to coition, sexual thrill is absent with suppression of menses.

In sterility Agnus Castus can be compared with Borax, Lycopodium, Nat. Carb, Platina and Sepia.

Borax : In Borax hot, acrid leucorrhoea causes death of sperms thereby preventing pregnancy
.
Lycopodium :Coition is prevented by dryness of vagina (Nat Mur., Lyssin).

Nat Carb :There is discharge of mucus from vagina after an embrace causing sterility.

Platina : Here coition is prevented by extreme sensitiveness of the vagina (Thuja).

Sepia :In Sepia also, there is aversion to opposite sex, to coition, even young newly married Sepia lady has no desire for intercourse. Vagina painful especially on coition


Chapter 14 ALLIUM CEPA . 

INTRODUCTION

The mother tincture of Allium cepa is prepared from the fresh red bulbs which abundantly grow in India. Ordinarily it has no therapeutic value, but when it is potentised, it serves as an excellent remedy for any catarrhal inflammation. It is more or less an acute drug.

CLINICAL

Catarrah, Cold, Coryza, Cough, Diarrhoea, Influenza, Injury, Laryngitis, Nasal polypus, Throat affections, Whooping cough etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its main seats of action are conjunctiva, mucous membrane of nose, respiratory tract, intestine, nerves and veins.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes irritation of conjunctiva and mucous membrane of nose, respiratory and gastro-intestinal tracts, producing acute catarrhal inflammation and profuse discharge.
It also causes neuralgia and inflammation of veins.

CONSTITUTION

Since it is mainly an acute drug, consideration: .of . constitution is not important. The patient is, however, very hot with psoric miasm in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Allium cepa is a left sided medicine. Symptoms go from left to-right.

2. In common cold or cough or headache, which is aggravated in a warm room, better in open air and worse again on-returning to a warm room, Allium cepa must be thought of.
3. Profuse watery and acrid nasal discharge with profuse bland lachrymation (rev. of Euphrasia where nasal discharge is bland and lachrymation is acrid).
4. Desire for raw onion is an indication for the remedy (Cub.).
5. Aggravation in warm room and in the evening; relieved in cold room and open air.
6. Violent laryngitis, cough seems to TEAR AND SPLIT THE LARYNX.
7. Neuralgic pain like a long thread following amputation or nerve injuries is relieved by this remedy.
8. Thread like pain, in various parts, is characteristic of Allium cepa. 
9. Ailments from : Exposure to damp north-western cold wind, bad effects from getting wet, salad, cucumber.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
There is catarrhal dull headache with coryza, which aggravates in warm room, better in open air and worse again on returning to a warm room.
Eyes :
The eyes are burning, biting, smarting as from smoke, must rub them for relief, watery and suffused; capillaries are injected, congested and EXCESSIVE LACHRYMATION WHICH IS PROFUSE-BUT
BLAND.
Nose :
The discharge from nose is also profuse and watery but ACRID. Excoriates the part touched by the nasal discharge. The nasal discharge drops from tip of the nose.
There may also be nasal polypus found in the patient (Sanguinaria, Psorinum, Mar.v., Sang. Nit.).
Coryza :
There is spring coryza after exposure to damp northwestern wind; discharges burn and corrode the nose and upper lip. catarrhal laryngitis, with severe cough which compels the patient to grasp the larynx: seems as if the cough would fear the larynx.

Modalities: The above symptoms of headache, eyes, nose and coryza are aggravated in the evening, in a warm room and are relieved in the open air and in a cold room.

Colic :
Allium cepa patient may also suffer from colic usually caused from cold; by getting feet wet; from overeating; cucumbers; salads; haemorrhoidal; of children; is aggravated by sitting and relieved by moving about.

Injury :
If in neuralgia the pain is like a long thread on face, hand, neck or chest or if there is traumatic chronic neuritis of neuralgia after amputation with burning and stinging pain Allium cepa is the remedy.
Phlebitis :
Furthermore, if phlebitis, puerperal or after forceps delivery, develops or panaritia with red streaks up the arm with pain driving the patient to despair, in child-bed Allium cepa is to be thought of as an effective remedy.

For the sore and raw spots on feet especially heel, ‘from friction particularly when the feet are rubbed sore” Allium cepa is very much efficacious.
General Modalities : 
Aggravation: Predominantly in the evening and in warm room (puls—in open air, Euphrasia).
Amelioration: In cold room and open air (puls).

Relations :
Complementary to Phosphorus, Puls., Thuja. Compatible before Calcarea and Silicea in polypus, Similar to Euphrasia, but coryza and lachrymation are opposite.Bad effects from getting wet (Rhus tox.).Antidoted by: Am., Cham., Nx v., Thuja.


Chapter 15 ALOE SOCOTRINA

INTRODUCTION
Aloe socotrina is an excellent remedy like Nux vomica in re-establishing physiological equilibrium after much drugging where disease and drug symptoms are mixed to form a common pool. For this wonderful medicine, Dr. N.M. Choudhury has masterly remarked that “To write a Materia Medica without Aloe is to write a novel without a hero.” Its importance and usefulness become evident as soon as we launch in our business of curing the sick.

CLINICAL
Abdominal disorders, Anal affection, Colic, Constipation, cough, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Haemorrhoids, Skin affections, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts especially upon the nervous system, portal system, blood and skin. It has got special action upon the liver and intestine.

PATHOGENESIS
When acting on mucous membrane of gastrointestinal tract, it produces diarrhoea, dysentery and haemorrhage from the haemorrhoidal vessels. It affects the intestine
especially rectum producing loss of control of sphincter ani. It also causes congestion of various parts, especially abdomen, pelvic organs and head.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Especially suited to old people, women of relaxed, phlegmatic habit. Indolent weary persons leading sedentary life, averse to either physical and
mental labour.
Temperament: Bilious temperament,
Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient.
Miasm: Psora is in the background,

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :
1. Profuse jelly like of mucus from all mucous membranes, especially of intestine a throat (Kali bi., Podo., Helleborus).
2. Insecurity of rectum with want of confidence and power in sphincter ani.
3. Hot patient, aggravation from warm and amelioration from cold water, cold weather.
4. Itch appears each year as winter approaches.
5. Dissatisfied and angry about himself or his complaints, especially when constipated.
6. Haemorrhoid like a bunch of grapes, blue, which bleeds and is sore, tender and hot with itching relieved by cold application.
7. Diarrhoea followed by obstinate constipation.
8. Solid stool passes out involuntarily.

PARTICULARS
Headache :

Causation: Due to insufficient stool and from sedentary life.

Location: Headache across the forehead.

Character: Congestive type of headache, sensation of heat on the surface with feeling of congestion and fulness, aching pain above the forehead, with heaviness in the eyes, must close them.

Modalities: Aggravation from every foot-step, from heat and amelioration from cold application.

Concomitants: Headache alternates with lumbago.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Diarrhoea :

Causation: after eating and drinking.

Time: Early in the morning. The patient has to hurry to the closet, driving out of bed. early in the morning (Psor., Rumex, Sulphur) Or immediately after eating and drinking WITH WANT OF CONFIDENCE IN SPHINCTER ANI.
Quantity : Scanty stool.
Character: WATERY, yellowish, jelly-like mucus in the stool, pajnful.
Before stool : The abdomen is distended with gas, causing a feeling of fulness and tightness with rumbling and gurgling sound in the abdpmen, with sudden urging and heaviness in the rectum.

During stool: Cutting, griping pain in right lower portion of abdomen, excruciating type of pain with much flatus, When passing flatus, sensation as if stool would also pass with it. The flatus is very offensive, burning and copious. Much flatus with small quantity of stool, Earning in anus after passage of flatus, Also during stool, there is gushing of thin, yellowigh, watery, offensive and excoriating faeces which burns like fire making the anus sore. Hungry during stool


After stool: All pains cease after stool, LEAVING PROFUSE SWEATING AND PROFOUND WEAKNESS. Aggravation after eating and drinking. Concomitants: Diarrhoea alternates with Headache. 

Dysentery :
There is inflammatory condition of lower portion of colon and rectum.

Character of stool: Bloody discharge with much jelly-like mucus and less blood. Sometimes the patient passes nothing but large quantity of jelly-like mucus only.

Before stool: Rumbling sound in the abdomen which is full of gas.
During stool: Cutting, griping pain in the lower portion of abdomen.
After stool: Profound weakness and prostration.
Modalities: Aggravation after eating and drinking.
Constipation :
Causation: Sedentary life.
Character of stool: Hard lump without any urging to stool. Solid stool and masses of mucus pass involuntarily. There is entire loss of sensation in anus, no feeling during passage of stool.

Piles :
Causation: Sedentary life and portal congestion.
Character: Bleeding piles.
Appearance: Like a bunch of grapes; bluish in colour.

Character of pain: Constant bearing down pain in the recturny iwith intense itching and burning in anus, preventing sleep. Very much tender, hot and sore with loose stool.

Modalities :
Aggravation: From heat.
Amelioration: By cold application.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Early in the morning, sedentary life, hot dry weather, after eating and drinking, standing or walking.
Amelioration: Cold water, cold weather, discharge of flatus and stool. 
Relations :

Complementary to Sulphur. It is antidoted by Sulphur, but it resembles Sulphur in many syrnptoms and is of equal importance with Sulphur in chronic diseases with abdominal plethora.


Chapter 16 ALUMINA

Aluminium Hydrate HAHNEMANN Al(OH)

INTRODUCTION

As a result of a fast civilization, people are much habituated to using metals and their compounds for various purposes. One of them is the use of metals in cooking utensils Aluminium being the major component. Prolonged use of these utensils brings a state of chronic aluminium poisoning. This state is now-a-days often met with for which potentised Aluminium is the remedy. Hering has remarked “apparently as usual, crude poison is antidoted by its potencies—200, etc.”

CLINICAL 

Anus affection, Constipation of infants, Cough, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Eczema, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Locomotor Ataxia, Menstrual disorders, Nervous affection, Skin affection etc. 

SPHERES OF ACTION 

Alumina directly affects the motor nervous system; most specific action is on mucous membrane, specially of intestine and vagina. Skin remains the main seat of action.

PATHOGENESIS

When acting on the motor nervous system, it produces a state of paralysis—paralytic condition. By its action on mucous membrane, like Bryonia, it produces a condition of extreme dryness, lack of secretion, with more or less irritation. Skin under the action of
this drug also becomes dry. 

CONSTITUTION

Physical makeup: Alumina patient is spare, dry, thin, having dark complexion, persons of sedentary habits who suffer from chronic ailments; to constitutions which suffer from diminished animal heat.

Temperament: Hypochondriac.
Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.
Miasm: Psora is in the background.
Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis. 
Alumina
GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1.Very chilly patient, deficient in animal heat and relieved by warmth in general,except skin eruptions.

2. Dryness of all the mucous membranes of the body; also there is dry skin.

3. There is extreme inactivity of the rectum; even soft stool requires great straining. There is no desire for stool for days together.

4. Obstinate constipation due to paretic condition of the intestine and rectum and dryness of mucous membrane. Requires great straining even   to void soft stool which  adheres to the rectum like clay (Platina).

5. There is diarrhoea when the patient urinates (Mur.ac).

6. Leucorrhoea is profuse, transparent and acrid, running down to heels; more during day and better by cold bathing. There is intense craving for    undigestible things, such    as starch, chalk, charcoal,cloves, coffee, teagrounds, etc. Aversion to meat and potato which disagree.
  
7. Inability to walk except with eyes open and in the daytime (Arg-nit., Gels.).

8. Trembling of the whole body with desire to lie down which, however, aggravates the fatigue.

9. All irritating things—salt, wine, vinegar, pepper, et¢., immediately produce cough.

10. Aggravation at new and full moon, in cold air, from eating potatoes. Amelioration in summer weather, from warmth and while eating.

11. Mind : The patient is very hasty and hurried. Timepasses too slowly; an hour seems half a day (Arg.nit., Cannabis indica, Medorrhinum— rev. of Cocculus). Great mental confusion persists; confusion of mind and ideas. Confused as to his personal identity itself. The consciousness of his existence is forgotten. He is not exactly who he is, it seems as though he were not himself. The patient makes mistakes in writing and speaking, uses wrong words. He is very sad and has variable mood. Yet there is another-state of mind too, where the patient is very much impulsive; when he sees sharp instruments or blood,impulses rise up so as to kill himself. Most of the mental symptoms come on in the morning or on walking in the morning.

PARTICULARS

Gastrointestinal symptoms :

Stomach : Abnormal craving for starch, charcoal, cloves, coffee or tea-grounds, acid and undigestible things. (Calc. carb., Nitric acid, Cicuta, Cina, Psorinum). There is no desire to eat; potatoes disagree, aversion to meat. Chronic eructation for years, up and down, worse in the evening.

Diarrhoea : Inactivity of the rectum and paralytic condition of the intestine is well-marked.Consequently, there is great straining. Even soft stool requires great straining (Anac., Platina, Nit. acid.). There is diarrhoea when the patient urinates. The patient has to strain at stool in order to urinate. Diarrhoea after eating potatoes.

Constipation :
Causation: Due to dryness of mucous membrane and paretic condition of the intestine, there is inactivity of the rectum.
During stool: There is great straining; patient has to strain a lot to pass stool, even soft stoo| requires great straining. There is no desire to pass stool unless there  is large accumulation. Patient must grasp the seat of closet tightly.
Character of stool: Stool is dry, hard, knotty, covered with mucus. Soft stool adheres to the parts (Platina).After stool: Rectum feels sore, inflamed and bleeding.
Concomitants: The patient has to strain at stool in order to urinte. There is also constipation of nursing children from artificial food, bottle-fed babies Podo.

Menses :
Time: Too early.
Quantity: Scanty.
Character of blood: Pale.
During menses: The sufferings are terrible and the patient is miserable at the menstrual period,although the flow is scanty it is prostrating.
After menses: The patient is exhausted mentally and physically, scarcely able to speak.It makes the woman nearly tired and takes until next period tecget straightened.
Leucorrhoea :
Time: During the day (rev. Syphilinum).
Quantity: Profuse and copious; running down to heels. :
Character: Acrid, yellow, and excoriating. The discharge of leucorrhoea is thick, yellowish, but it may be albuminous and stringy, looking like white of an egg. Leucorrhoea is corroding, profuse and running down to the -heels; more noticeable in daytime because these complaints are generally worse» when walking or standing.

Modalities: Worse during daytime and better by cold bathing.

Nervous symptoms :
Alumina causes paretic condition of muscles. Paralysis of one side of the body or paralysis of the muscles of ithe lower extremities. The paralytic state begins as semi-paralysis; for a long time merely jus!as inactivity, which grows at length into a complete paralytic condition.The paralytic state runs through the remedy and is observed in various parts in many ways.Pains in the sole of foot on stepping; numbness of the heels when walking. Feeble circulation, feeble conductivity and feeble nerve action; everything is slowed down.One sided paralysis, especially of extensors; pain in arms and fingers, arms.feel paralysed. Trembling here and there in the body; slow, tottering gait, staggers on walking.There is inability to walk except with eyes open and in the daytime; tottering and falling when eye are closed (Arg. nitricum, Gels.).


Alumina 
Skin :
Dry type of skin eruptions. The,skin withers, becomes dry and is subject to eruption, thickening, ulceration and bleeding. Tettery type of, skin eruption. The skin is damaged and fissured from its dryness.
Dryness and burning of the skin run through the remedy.

Time: Aggavated in winter.
Character: The skin itches even when there is no eruption; more itching from warmth of bed. The patient scratches until the skin bleeds, then becomes painful. The eruptions are worse in the warmth of bed. The striking feature of this remedy is chronic dryness of the skin.Sweat is rare and if occurs, it is scanty. Alumina is not suited to those with copious exhaustive sweat. It is thus the very opposite of Calcarea carb. which sweats profusely; but Alumina is no doubt, very much exhaustive due to spinal and-paralytic affection, but does not sweat.

Modality: All skin symptoms are WORSE IN WINTER.
General Modalities :
Aggravation: In cold air, during winter, from eating potatoes, in the morning on waking, full and new moon.
Amelioration: In summer weather, from warm drink.

Relations :

Complementary to Bryonia.
Alumina is the chronic of Bryonia.
Alumina is one of the chief antidotes for lead poisoning, painter’s colic (Plumbum). The action of Alumina is slow in developing and the remedy must not be changed quickly.

The following medicines have relation to the moon’s phases :-

Aggravation: At New Moon; Alumina, Ammon. carb., Calcarea carb., Causticum, Cuprum met,Sepia, Silicea.

Aggravation: At full Moon; Alumina, Cal. carb., Graphites, Nat. carb., Nat.mur. Sepia, Silicea, Sulphur.

Aggravation during increasing Moon: Arnica.

Aggravation during waning Moon: Dulc., Thuja.
  
chapter 17 AMBRA GRISEA
    
Ambergris A. Nosode

INTRODUCTION 

 About its origin Dr. H.C.Allen says. “Of doubtful origin, for years on the border land as to its true classification, but probably a nosode or morbid product found in the belly of the spermwhale. It has many characteristics of intestinal or biliary concretions and has been
considered to be of hepatic origin, probably a fatty excretion from its gall bladder” Dr. N.M.Chowdhury says, “Ambergris is a fatlike substance found in the intestines and among the excreta of the spermwhale.” The Oil of Amber i.e. Oleum Succium should not be confounded with
Ambergris.

CLINICAL

Constipation. Convulsions. Cough. Dyspepsia. Hysteria. Menstrual disorder.Leucorrhoea. Neuroses. Nymphomania. Ranula.

SPHERES OF ACTION 

It affects predominantly nervous system especially pneumogastric, spinal nerves and solar plexus. It also acts on gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts and female genital organs. 

PATHOGENESIS 

Acting on nervous system it produces faintness, jerking, twitching and other nervous hysterical manifestations. It affects female genital organs manifesting as leucor-rhoea.,menstrual disorder and pruritus valvae etc. |

CONSTITUTION 

Physical make up : It is suited to old people and children especially young girls whol are excitable, nervous and weak. Lean, thin emaciated nervous persons and thin scrawny women (Sec. Cor.)

Temperament—Nervous bilious temperament.

Heat cold relation—Patients are aggravated from warm and better from cold i general. Miasm—Psora and syphilis are in the background.

Ambra Grista

GUIDING SYMPTOMS 

1) Great bashfulness is very characteristic of Ambra Grisea.
2) The presence of others is unbearable during stool, when urinating even can’t do any thing in pressence of others.
3) After business embarrassments, unable to sleep, must get up (Act., Sep.)
4) Sensation of coldness in abdomen (Cal.)
5) Discharge of blood between periods, at every little accident—a long walk, after every hard stool etc.
6) Leucorrhoea : Thick, bluish-white mucus especially or only at night (Caust, Merc., Nit Ac.)
7) Cough in spasmodic paroxysms, with eructation and hoarseness. Ranula with foetid breath.
8) One sided complaints.
9) Mind : The red strand of this remedy is found in its bash fulness, embarassment and nervousness. The patient is excitable, nervous and hysterical. He is intensely shy blushes easily. He can’t do any thing in presence of others. The presence of others even the nurse, is unbearable during stool, when urinating. There is great sadness, patient sits for days weeping. Music is intolerable, causes weeping. Dread of people and desires to be alone. Restless, excited, despair and very loquacious. Time passes too slowly. Fears of becoming insane. The presence of other people and music aggravate the symptoms. Ambra is a good remedy for sleeplessness due to nervousness and business embarrassment.

PARTICULARS

Gastrointestinal Symptoms :

Stomach : Eructations with violent convulsive cough. Distension of stomach after midnight. Heart burn from drinking milk, Thirstlessness.
Abdomen : Flatulence, distended abdomen after midnight. Sensation of coldness in abdomen.

Constipation : There is frequent ineffectual desire for stool which makes the patient anxious. The presence of others even the nurse is unbearable during stool, Inveterate constipation in old people.

Modality: Aggravation—After eating, warm drink especially warm milk after midnight, in the morning.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Cough : Violent nervous cough in spasmodic paroxsysms with eructations and hoarseness.Hollow, spasmodic barking cough coming from deep in chest. Whooping cough without .crowing inspiration, morning with, evening without expectoration.

Modality : Agg.—Talking, reading aloud, in presence of people, Music.

Asthma : It is very good medicine for asthma of old people and children. Whistling in chest duringbreathing. Asthma comes on while he is attempting coition.

Female Sexual Organs :
It has marked action on female genital organs. Menses—Too early and too profuse. There is discharge of blood between periods at every little accident such as a long walk and after every hard stool.

Leucorrhoea—Discharge of profuse, thick bluish white mucus especially or only at night, Often associated with nymphomania. Pruritus Vulvae—Itching of pudendum with soreness and swelling. During urination, itching, titillation, burning of valva and urethra. There is also burning of sexual parts.

General Modalities :

Aggravation—Warm drinks, warm room, music, lying down, reading or talking aloud, the presence of many people, after waking.
Amelioration—After eating, cold air, cold food and drinks, rising from bed.


Chapter :18 
AMMONIUM CARBONICUM
ous Sip Bieta oe AR ah Si a el Smelling Salt HAHNEMANN NH,HCO,NH,NH,CO, AL a pc cee 

INTRODUCTION

Ammon. carb. is a very effective remedypotentised from the pure salt-carbonate ofammonium. Hahnemann s masterly knowledgein Chemistry revealed to him the curat.ve powero this powerful irritant, smelling salt.

CLINICAL
Asthma, Bronchitis, Cough,  Epistaxis,Emphysema, Haemorrhage, Headache, Heartaffection, Leucorrhoea, Menstrual disorders. Noseaffection, Skin affection, Tonsillitis, ete.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts on blood, cardio-vascular system, respiratory and gastro-intestinal tract,female genital organs, nerves and bones.

PATHOGENESIS
Ammon. Carb. causes degeneration of blood and haemolysis, diminishes tendencey tocoagulation and oxygen carrying capacity affects the blood vessels resulting inhaemorrhage, irritates mucous membrane of respiratory and gastro-intestinal tract,setting in catarrhal condition; snuffles of nose, cholera like symptoms, initiate profuse
menstruation; by its affection of nerves, it produces increased activity of blood vesselsand heart.

CONSTITUTION

It is specially suited to women and children.Make-up of the body: Stout, fleshy and delicate women who lead sedentary life, witha “smelling-bottle” always in the hand.
Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.
Miasm: Psora is in the background.
Diathesis: Haemorrhagic diathesis.

 GUIDING SYMPTOMS
 1 . It is a RIGHT-SIDED remedy.
 2 . Haemorrhagic tendency; blood becomes fluid, haemolysis and degeneration ofR.B.C. take place, and consequently blood has diminished tendency to coagulate and anless     capacity to carry oxygen; dark, degenerated, watery, offensive and non- coagulable blood.
  3 . Ulcertions tend to gangrene.
  4 .  Fat patient with weak heart; palpitation and faintness.
  5 .  Heaviness in all organs.
  6 .  Children dislike washing (Antim.crud., Sulphur).
  7 .  Epistaxis, WHEN WASHING THE FACE in the morning or after eating, especially from left nostril.
  8 . Stopping of nose, mostly at night; must breathe through the mouth (Hepar sulph.,Nux vom., Sambucus, Lyco.).
  9. Cough is dry, from tickling in throat as from dust; cough with asthmatic oppression between 3 to 4 a.m.; cough that may remain after influenza, when everything else has failed. CHOLERA-LIKE SYMPTOMS AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF MENSTRUATION (Bovista, Ver.alb. Constipation, Sil.) Desire to lie on abdomen from which the patient gets relief.

 Mind : Ill-humoured during wet stormy weather.

 Ailments from : Leading sedentary life, exposure to cold, stormy wet weather. 

 PARTICULARS
 Headache:
 Causation: Exposure to cold, wet stormy weather.
 Location: Headache is felt more in the forehead.
 Sensation: Sensation of fulness as if the forehead would burst.

Modalities:
Aggravation: From cold, cold washing and during menses.
Amelioration: By pressure and lying on painful side.

Nose :

Nose-bleed WHEN WASHING THE FACE AND HANDS in the morning, after earing; bleeding from left nostril. Blood rushes to tip of nose when stooping.
Ozaena; when blowing, bloody mucous from nose comes out frequently.Stooping of nose, mostly at night, must breath through the mouth. Long-lasting coryza; “snuffles” of infants (Hepar, Nux vom., Sambucus, Lyco, Lachesis).  In diphtheria, the nose is stopped and the child cannot get sleep because it cannot breathe.The patiaent gets relief from these troubles in dry weather.

Throat :

There is putrid sore throat. The tonsils and glands are engorged.There is tendency to gangrenous ulceration of tonsils.cDiphtheritic attack with Stoppage of nose. cough is severe every morning from 3 to 4 a.m Cough dry, from tickling in throat as from dust.Aggravation from cold and relief from dry weather.

Emphysema :

Ammon. Carb. is one of the best remedies for emphysema, with much oppression in breathing andtired feeling in chest.

Heart :

There is great dyspnoea with palpitation, and faintness. Dyspnoea is worse by exertion or onascending steps; WORSE IN A WARM ROOM.

Menses :

Ammon. carb. is one of the best medicines for menstrual troubles which are as follows:-

Time: Too early.

Quantity: Too profuse, copious at night and when sitting.

Duration: Lasting too long.

Character of blood: Acrid, making the things sore. Concomitant: CHOLERA LIKE SYMPTOMSAT THE COMMENCEMENT OF MEANSES (Bovista, Ver. alb.)At the time of menses, there is too much colic which is griping in character, fatigue especially ofthigh and with sadness (Nitric acid, Stannum).
There is great yawning and chilliness during menses. Furthermore, there may also be toothache atthe time of menses.

Leucorrhoea :

Leucorrhoea is watery, profuse and acrid, burning from uterus, excoritates the vulva.

Fever :

During fever, which may be eruptive or non-eruptive, the body is red as if from scarlatina, with deepsleep and stertorous breathing. There may be miliary rashes or faintly developed eruptions from defective Vitality with threatened paralysis of brain. This remedy is also quite suitable for whitlow (Panaritium) which is deep seated, with periosteal pain.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Cold, wet weather; poultices; from washing, curing menses,

Amelioration: Lying on abdomen, on painful side, in dry weather and warmth.

Relations :

It antidotes poisoning with Rhustox. and stings of insects. Ammon carb. is inimical to Lachesis.

Antidoted by: Arnica, Camphor.


chapter : 19 AMMONIUM MURIATICUM

Sal Ammoniac NENNING 


CLINICAL:

Anosmia. Bronchitis. Constipation. Coryza.Cough. Diarrhoea. Haemorrhoids. Leucorrhoea.Menstrual disorder.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS :

It affects mucous mem-branes increasing the secretion and retaining them especially in chest and gall ducts. It causes irregular circulation,
blood seems to be in constant turmoil andthereby producing ebullitions, burnings and localized throbbing.

It has also marked action on liver and female genital organs. It causes ulceration andulcerative pains also dislocation like pains and tension as if tendons were contracted.

CONSTITUTION :

Make up—It is especially adopted to those who are fat and sluggish or body large andfat, but legs too thin. Women having large buttocks.
Temperament—Melancholic and disposition to tears. Relation with heat & cold:Chilly patient Miasm : Psoric and syphilitic.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :
1) Body large and fat but legs too thin.
2) Symptoms accompanied by cough and profuse glairy secretions.
3) Diarrhoea and vomiting even bloody discharge from the bowels during menses (Amm.Garb.,Ver.alb.,Puls.) with flow more profuse at night.
4) Leucorrhoea : Like white of an egg, (Alum., Borax, Calc. P.) preceded by gripping pain about the navel; brown, slimy, painless, after every urination.
5) Like other salts of chloride, it has crumbling from the verge of anus. (Nat. M., Mag. M.) Hard crumbling stools require great effort in expulsion.
6) Coryza—Discharge is thin, watery & acrid corroding the inside of the nostrils and  the upper lip (AII.C., Ars alb., Ars.Iod.)
7) Sensation of coldness in the back, between scapulae(Lachn.)
8) Tension in the Joints, as from shortening of the muscles. Contractibn of hamstring tendons. 
9) Piles especially after suppressed leucorrhoea; burning and stinging in the rectum for  hours after stool.
10) Offensive sweat of the feet.
11) Mind—She is melancholic, morose, ill-humoured with irritability and disposition tobe angry. She has antipathy to certain persons which is very peculiar to herself.Full of grief with desire to cry but cann’t.
12) Ailments from—Suppressed leucorrhoea.

PARTICULARS :

Respiratory symptoms

Nose : Thin watery acrid and hot discharge corroding the inside of the nose and upper lip.There is loss of smell with obstructed, stuffy feeling and desire to blow it out.

Cough : Cough is dry, hacking but loose in afternoon with profuse expectoration & rattling of mucus. There may be hoarseness and burning in larynx.
Modality: Aggravation : by lying on back or right side.

Concomitant—Cough with profuse .salivation and liver symptoms even other symptoms if accompanied by cough.Rectal symptoms :

Constipation : Like other muriates, Ammon Mur. patient is usually constipated. There is crumbling from the verge of anus. Hard crumbling stools require great effort in expulsion. Stools vary in colour, no two stools alike (Puls.) and covered with glairy mucus.
Haemorhoids : It can be thought of in piles especially after suppressed leucorrhoea. Haemorrhoidssore and smarting. There is burning and stinging in the rectum during and for hours after stool (Aesc., Sulph.)

Female genital Organs :

Menses : Time : Too early.

Quantity—Too profuse.

Character of flow : Blood is black & clotted. Flow more at night.

Concomitant: During menses haemorrhage from the bowels or rectum with cholera like symptoms (Ammon Garb., Bov., Ver. Alb.) There is also pain in abdomen and small of back during menses.

Leucorrhoea : Leucorrhoea is like white of an egg, preceded by.griping pain about the navel. There is also painless discharge of brown, slimy, mucus especially after every urina-tion.

General Modalities : Aggravation : Morning, (Head & Chest Symptoms), afternoon (abdominal symptoms) Amelioration : Open air. Relations ; Followed by Ant, C., Phos., Puls., Sanic.

Antidotes : Coffea, Nux., Caust.





Chapter:20 AMYLENUM NITROSUM 


Nitrite of Amyle TF ALLEN 

INTRODUCTION

The Nitrite of Amyle was introduced into medicine by the oldschool as a remedy for Angina pectoris, and was supposed to act bylessening arterial tension.

CLINICAL:

Angina pectoris, Blushing. Convulsions. Epilepsy.Climacteric-ailments of. Flushings. Headache.Heart-affection of. Sea-sickness. Sunstroke.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS :

Tt affects the vaso-motor. nerves causing dilatation of allarterioles and capillaries” thereby flushing of face, heat and throbbing in the head are produced.

CONSTITUTION :

Make up—It is suited to patients subject to flushings and blushings, nervous, sensitive, plethoric women during and after menopause.
Temperament—Nervous, anxious patient.Relation with heat & cold—Hot patientMiasm—Psoric.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Flushings : Start from face, stomach, various parts of the body followed by often profuse hot sweatings and prostration.
2) Intense surging of blood to face and head (Bell., Glon.) I 
3) Face flushes at the slightest emotion (Coca., Per.)
4) Craves fresh air, patient opens clothing, removes bed covering and opens windows in the coldest weather (Arg Nit., Lach., Sulph.)
5) Constant stretching for hours, impossible to satisfy the desire and call for help tostretch.
6) Profound and repeated yawning (Kali C.)
7) Collar seems too tight, must loosen it (Lach,, Sepia)
8) Hemicrania, especially when affected side is pallid,
9) Puerperal convulsions immediately after delivery.
10) Blushing : Chronic and acute.
11) Angina pectoris : Tumultuous heart action, intense throbbing of heart and carotids (Glon.)

 Mind : Anxiety as if something might happen. Must have fresh air.

 Aggravation : Mental & Physical exertion.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation : Climacteric headache. Location : Hemicrania especially left side is affected. SensationThere is sensation as if blood would start through skin, with heat & redness and sensation as if something were rushing up into the head, with throbbing. There is intense surging of blood to face and head.
Modality: Aggravation : In warm room, mental & physical exertion.
Amelioration : Open air, cold water, cold air.
Concomitant: Affected side often looks paler than the other side. Easy flushing and blushing of theface.

Heart:

Amy Nitrite is one of the grand remedies for Angina pectoris in our Materia Medica. There is praecordial anxiety, cardiac oppression, stitching pains and a feeling of constric-tion in the cardiac region. At the least excitement the face looks flushed and pulsation is felt over the entire body. The heart’s action becomes intensified and almost tumultuous. Intense throbbing of the carotids is also noticed. Patient craves fresh air. There is sensation of swelling of the front of chest and a bursting out feeling in ears. Profound and repeated yawning.

Relations :

Similar: to., Bell., Cac., Coca., Fer., Glon., Lach,

N.B.: Acts promptly by inhalation ; resuscitates persons sinking under anaesthetics. Crude drug chiefly palliative ; must be repeated as patient becomes accustomed to it ; is curative in the stronger higher potencies. The cure more frequently depends upon the strength of the potency than many who have not put it to theCurative test imagine.


chapter :21 ANACARDIUM ORIENTALE


Marking nut STAPF Anacardiacene

INTRODUCTION


Anacardium is a unique discovery which is prepared form the husk of marking nut. It has been proved to be an excellent remedy and very much akin to its botanical relatives, the different species of Rhus, particularly in the sphere of skin affection and its symptoms, such as vesicular eruptions with intense burning and itching. It is best known for its peculiar and extreme mental symptoms.

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Abdominal affections, Brain fag,Constipation, Cough, Debility, Dyspesia, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Heart affection, Loss of memory and mental weakness, Nervous aliments, Skin affection, Warts, Writer’s cramp. etc. Dr. Tyler has summarised Anacardium thus: Anacardium, marking nut plugged sensation, eye to gut,Anacardium, here’s your guide,Plug within, tight band outside.Mentally two wills oppose,Which to obey he never knows.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on mind and nerves, stomach, rectum and skin. Acts directly upon thesensorium, depressing the cerebral centres and the organs of special senses.

PATHOGENESIS

It is mostly used in cases of neurosyphilis producing brain fag. It also acts on nerves producing a condition known as neivous dyspepsia.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Pale face with blue ring around the eyes
.
Temperament: Highly irritable, slight causes make him excessively angry.

Relation with heat and cold: It is neither chilly not hot.

Miasm: Psora and syphilis are in the background.

Anacardium Orientale 5

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. All gone Sensation in stomach, comes on only’when stomach is empty and is relieved By eating and during the process of digestion (Chel. Jodum,   Petroleum, Sepia).
. Plug-like sensation in the inner parts such as anus, oesophagus, etc.
. Constrictive sensation of a hoop or band around the parts e.g. head, knee, etc.(Sulphur, Carbolic acid).
. Great desire for Stool, but with the effort the desire passes off without evacuation.
. Symptoms prone to go from right to left (Lyco.). /


 Mind :
       Anacardium patients manifest very peculiar and striking mental symptoms which are as follows:-


There is SUDDEN LOSS OF MEMORY, the patient is very much disturbed about his forgetfulness. The patient is so forgetful that he even     forgets his own name and the        names of well known places and most intimate friends.There is irresistible desire to curse.and swear (Lil. tig., Lac, can., Nit. ac.).Sensation of a hoop or band around the parts. Feels he has two wills; one commanding him to do what the other forbids and he does not know what to do. In one ear a devil prompts him to do murder, in the other an angel counsels him to do acts of benevolence. In Anacardium patient, there is very strange temper. He laughs at serious matter and becomes serious over laughable matter (Bar. Carb., PlatinaWhen walking, he feels as if some one is following him. Great illusion, delusion and hallucinations.Suspicious—doubts, everything around him. Takes bad side of everything andbecomes violent. Cowardice.Very cruel, malicious and wicked; inflicts bodily injury upon himself. Absent minded and hypochondriacal. Lack of confidence in himself and others.Anxiety and feeling of impending misfortune.
   . 
      Ailments from : Bad effects of mental excitement, excessive utilisation of brain for purposeless thoughts, consequences of fright and mortifications, sedentary habits.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causasion : Nervous headache of sedentary persons from anxiety, fear or fright.

Location: In forehead.temples, vertex and occiput.

Sensation: Of a plug in the inner part.

Character of Pain: Pressing pain as if from a plug in the inner part

Modalities:
° Aggravation: From mental exertion, empty stomach and by motion.

¢ Amelioration: By lying down, When earing and when falling asleep. Gastro-intestinal symptoms,

Stomach :
Causation: Sedentary habits.
Sensation: “All gone” sensation in the stomach. }

Character: Gastric headache of persons who lead a sedentary life and who eat and drink in hurry with choking sensation in the throat while swallowing. There is “all gone” sensation in the stomach when it is empty.

Modalities: Aggravation in empty stomach and relieved by eating.

Rectum :

Paretic weakness or actual paralysis of the rectum, with great desire for stool but with the effort,the desire passes away without evacuation. There is plug-like sensation in rectum.

Skin :
Look of the skin: Erysipelatous eruptions of malignant type. Yellow vesicles with intense burning and itching. Warts on the palm of the hand (Natrum mur.). ‘

Eczema :

Intense itching with mental irritability, not relieved by scratching. Lichen Planus, neurotic eczema. Anaesthetic patches in leprosy, with ulcer fromation and trophic ulcers.

Modality: Aggravation from hot application.

Concomitants: Intense’ itching.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: During motion, mental work, empty stomach.

Amelioration From eating, lying down and falling asleep.

Relations :

Antidote—Rhus tox., Coffea.

Anacardium follows well after Lyco., and Puls.

Anacardium follows and is followed by Platina.


chapter: 22 ANTHRACINUM

A nosode (A product of Anthrax poison)

INTRODUCTION

Anthracinum was introduced into Homoeopathicpractice by “Lux” long before the experiment of“Pasteur”. Though it is not a polychrest medicinehaving limited sphere of action still it has got very important and respected place in Homoeopathy because it has got power to make surgeon’s knife useless and relieves the most serious cases of Carbuncle, Gangrene, Felons, Blood boils etc.

CLINICAL:

Acne. Boil. Carbuncle. Insect stings. Gangrene.

Malignant pustules. Felons. Septic fever. Splenic fever. Dissecting wounds. Anthrax poisoning by foul breath, Foul gas etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION :

Anthracinum has its centre of action over the connective tissues. It covers all theinflammatory conditions of connective tissue in which there exists some purulent focus.Tt also acts on skin.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Atrocious burning pains as if hot coals were applied to parts. (Ars.)

2) Discharges are ichorus, putrid and offensive from mouth, nose, throat, nostrils, vagina, rectum, ulcer, carbuncle etc. Horribly offensive (Ars., Pyr.).
3) Haemorrhages are black, thick, tar like, rapidly decomposing, from any orifice.

4) Tendency towards malignancy and rapid formation of gangrenous condition.

5) Fever, rapid loss of strength, great prostration, sinking pulse, delirium and fainting.

6) Affected parts turn black and blue.

7) Red lines from the area of infection marking the course of lymphatics.

8) Rapid spread of infiltration and oedema of cellular tissue. Excessive thirst with inability to swallow. We may compare Anthracinum with    Arsenic Album, Tarentula Cubensis & Secale Cornutum in relation with the above mentioned complaints,


Arsenic Alb. : In Arsenic Alb. we get the same atrocious burning pain ichorous and offensivedischarge, marked prostration and ailments from dissecting wounds and anthrax,—like Anthracinum. But unlike it Arsenic pains are relieved by Hot application, associated with great restlessness, midday,midnight aggravation and thirst for little quantity of water at short intervals.

Tarentula Cubensis : Tarentula Cub. is also useful in felons, carbuncles, boils, abscesses, malignantulcers, gangrene and anthrax.
Tarentula has also got atrocious burning pain, bluish discolouration of affected part; but pain associated with hyperaesthesia is its peculiarity.

There is pain of death; it soothes the last struggles. There may be aggravation by contact or touch , Of affected parts but relieved by rubbing affected parts.

Secale Cor : It is also a medicine for gangrene, ulcers, boils etc. Secale has also got burning as of sparks of fire. Haemorthages are offensive, putrid, watery, thin and black. Its Characteristic is relief of burning pain by cold application (rev. of Ars.)


Relation:
When Arsenic or best selected remedy fails to relieve the burning pains of Carbuncle or malignant ulceration, then think of Anthracinum. When Arsenic, Anthracinum fail to relieve terrible pains of cancer,carbuncle or erysipelas then think of Euphorbinum.


chapter:23 ANTIMONIUM ARSENICOSUM

Arseniate of Antimony ISNARD 

INTRODUCTION

It is the Arseniate of Antimony and hasbeen advocated greatly in emphysema.Hearer is the chief authority for this drug.

CLINICAL:

Cough. Catarrhal Pneumonia. Emphysema. Pleurisy : after effects of.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory Symptoms :

Antim Ars. has been found very useful in emphysema (Sienega, Amm. Garb) with excessive dyspnoea and cough cough with much mucus secretion and is aggravated by eating and lying down. It preferably affects upper left lung Dr. N.M. Chowdhury says, “After pneumonia and pleurisy when all the acute symptoms have subsided and only dyspnoea remains a few doses of Antim Ars. will be very useful.”

chapter:24 ANTIMONIUM CRUDUM

Sulphide of Antimony CASPARI Sb28,

INTRODUCTION

Here is yet another effective remedy from the Mineral kingdom—Antimonium crudum. The crude drug substance is a compound formed by Antimony and Sulphur. When it ispotentised, it becomes a very good polychrest
remedy. Antim. crud. corresponds in a sense to the race of SWINE, as ARESENIC does to HORSE and PULSATILLA to SHEEP.

CLINICAL

Catarrh, Constipation, Corns, Diarrhoea,Feet sore and horny, Fever, Lung affection, Piles, Stomach disorders, Skin affection, Thirst, Tongue coated, Voice low, Warts, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main action of Antim Crud. is on mucous membrane, especially, of stomach and intestine; then corners skin and mind.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes disorganisation and vital depression of mucbus membrane of stomach and intestine, interferes with digestion creating a catarrhal condition in the whole of intestinal canal, resulting in alternate diarrhoea and constipation and above all peculiar
tongue; it produces on skin a disturbed and depressed state of vitality and its action on brain results in various mental symptoms.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Suited to children and young people, who are inclined to growfat—extremes of life, having tendency to thick unhealthy skin. 
Old people with morning diarrhoea (Phosphorus).

Relation with heat and cold: Antim crud., patient is easily affected by extremes ofheat and cold and as such it is difficult to conclude whether he is hot or chilly.

Miasm: Psora and sycosis are in the background.
Diathesis: Rheumatic and Gouty diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

. A THICK MILKY WHITE COATING ON TONGUE is the red strand of the remedy:
. Patients who are in extremes of life and who are inclined to grow fat.
. Disposition to abnormal growth of skin, e.g. warts, corns: THICKANED SKIN IN ECZEMA.
. Symptoms when reappear, change locality or side (Lac. Gan:, Tuberculinum).
. Great desire for acids and pickles.
. AVERSION TO COLD BATHING (Ammon carb., Sulphur).
. General relaxation and great lassitude.
. Alternate diarrhoea and constipation especially in old people.
. CHILD CANNOT BEAR TO BE TOUCHED OR LOOKED AT.

Mind : Bad effects of disappointed love. Loathing of life. There is GREATSADNESS with weeping. Sentimental mood in the moonlight. Very peevish, angry and fretful; cannot bear to be touched or looked at (in case of a child).

Does not wish to speak or to be spoken to.Becomes angry at silly matters.Great despair, sad and melancholic.Wants to commit suicide by drowning.
Anxious; lachrymose mood and slightest thing affects her. There is irresistible desire to talk in rhymes, poems or repeat verses. Mental symptoms aggravate in moonlight.

Ailments from : Disappointed love, too much river or cold bathing, alcoholderanged digestion, acids, fat, fruits, suppressed eruption, overheating, overeating and sunburn, extremes ofheat and cold.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation: From river bathing, Cold Bathing, taking cold, alcohol, deranged digestion, acids, fat,fruits suppressed eruption.

Sensation: Congestive and throbbing headache.

Location: Over the entire head, especially at vertex.

Modality: Headache is relieved in the open air, during rest and after a warm bath.

Concomitants: Weakness of limbs, aversion to food from disordered stomach; vertigo with nauseaand occasional vomiting, congestion of blood to head resulting in nose-bleed Mouth :

Cracks and fissures at the corners of mouth, Canker sores in the mouth,A THICK MILKY WHITE COATING ON THE TONGUE is the red strand of remedy.

Throat :

Large quantities of mucous is hawked out from the posterior nares. Soreness in the throat, with asensation of plug in throat, constantly trying to swallow.

Stomach :
Causation: Gastric complaints from overeating, bread and pastry; acids, alcohol, vinegar, sour and bad wine; after cold bathing; overheating or hot weather.

Character: Digestion is easily disturbed and weak. Loss of appetite; constant discharge of flatus up and down for years; belching and eructation, pasting of ingesta. Nausea with desire to vomit. Gouty and rheumatic metastasis to stomach and bowels.

Stool :
Due to above-mentioned reasons, the patient may have alternate diarrhoea and constipation. Oldpeople will have morning diarrhoea, but suddenly become constipated. Diarrhoea :

Stool is watery with little hard lumps or contains undigested food particles. Diarrhoea from dietetic error, especially in summer. Cutting pain in stomach. Diarrhoea may end in dysentery.

Constipation :

Alternate diarrhoea and constipation. Sensation that much stool would pass, but only little hard stool is evacuated with much flatus. There may be haemorrhage from the bowel alongwith hard stool.

Haemorrhoids may also protrude. With discharge of mucous, staining yellow. There will be burning pricking pain in anus with catarrhal proctitis. Mucus piles with ichorous discharge from anus may also
be noticed.,

Respiratory organs :

Loss of voice from becoming Overheated. Whooping cough aggravated by overheating in summer or in a warm room, from cold washing. Burning sensation in the chest with oppressed breathing. Pulse is hard and rapid. Sensitive to cold air.

Modality: Aggravation from taking cold.

Skin : There is disposition to abnormal growth of skin. The skin becomes very thick at various places.Finger nails do not grow rapidly; crushed nails grow in and split like warts and horny spots.

Large horny corns on soles of feet (Ran.b., Hypericurn). Very sensitive when walking, especially over stone pavements. Measle like eruptions, smooth wart, or horny growth. Eruptions like boils and blisters, dry gangrene; scaly pustular eruptions with burnning and itching; worse at night. Nostril and labial commissures are sore, cracked and crusty. Corners of mouth cracked and fissured (Condu., Nitric-acid.)

Child :

The child can be aptly compared to swine due to its obesity and thick skin. The baby CANNOT BEAR TO BE TOUCHED OR LOOKED AT. Very angry at\little attention; does not wish to speak or to be spoken to. Child is very sad, weeping, peevish and irritable. The baby also often suffers from gastric complaints and has a THICK MILKY WHITE COATING ON THE TONGUE. Child always craves for acids and pickles.


There is great AVERSION TO COLD BATHING. Child cries when washed or bathed with coldwater; cold water causes violent headache.


General Modalities :
Aggravation : After eating; cold bath; acids and sour wine; after heat of sun or fire, extremes of cold or heat.

Amelioration: In the open air, during rest; after a warm bath.

Relations :

Complementary to Squilla. Similar to Bry., Ipec., Lyco., Puls., in gastric complaints.

Antidoted by: Calc. carb., Hepar sulph.

Followed by: Pulsatilla, Sulphur. aggravation from warmth.

Bryonia compares very closely in degestive conditions, coated tongue and  aggravation from warmth.


chapter: 25 ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM

Tartar Emetic STAFF 

INTRODUCTION

It is due to the emetic influence of the tartarised antimony that this medicine got its name “Tartar Emetic.” Emetic is a substance which when taken can make a person vomit. Vomiting is under the control of nerve centre present at the base of the brain in Medulla Oblongata. This medicine acts not only on those nerve centres, but also on the pneumogastric nerve to produce pneumonia and bronchitis.

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Aphthae, Asphyxia neonatorum,Asthma, Bronchitis, Catarrh, Chicken-pox,Cholera, Cough, Fever, Impetigo, Lung affection,Pneumonia, Rheumatism, Tongue coated,Vomiting, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Antim. tart, acts on respiratory organs, salivary glands, mucous membranes, brain,nerve and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action on the pneumogastric nerve causes depression of respiration and circulation and other symptoms, resembling pneumonia, bronchitis, asthma, etc. Nausea and vomiting are the manifestations of its influence on the Medulla Oblongata. While on the mucous membrane, it establishes catarrhal inflammation and increased secretion; on the skin it causes pustular eruption, resembling smallpox. The drug also promotes rapid waste of tissues.

CONSTITUTION
Antim. tart. has got hydrogenoid constitution of Grauvogl, torpid, phlegmatic persons. Child at birth is pale.
Diasm : Psora and Sycosis are in the background.
Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Usually suited (or diseases originating from exposure to damp basements or cellars, and after vaccination.
2. There is great accumulation of mucus in air passage which cannot be coughed out, but gives a rattling sound, popularly known as “Death Rattle”.
3. Face becomes pale, cyanosed and flushed due to circulation of unoxydised blood, face covered with cold sweat.
4, Nausea,vomiting, coldness and prostration run through the whole of this remedy.
5. All complaints are attended with IRRESISTIBLE DESIRE TO SLEEP.(Nux. mos., AEthusa, Gels).
6. There is excessive craving for apples and acids (Aloe). Desire for acids, acid fruits and apples; cold water; strong liquors. Aversion to milk and tobacco.
7, Vomiting in any position except when lying on right side. Vomits until he faints, followed by drowsiness, prostration and sleepiness.
8. Pneumonia with jaundice (Chel.)
9. Bad effects of vaccination, when Thuja fails and Silicea is not indicated; usually it produces asthma.
10. Pustular eruptions like small-pox is a great symptom of Ant.tart.

Mind : Confusion of head with a feeling as if he must sleep. Child will not allow itself to be touched. Bad humour during bronchial catarrh. Apprehension and restlessness during evening. Dread of being left alone. Mental excitement and
nervousness. The patient is frightened at night. Vertigo on closing the eyes, when walking and flickering before the eyes, when lifting the head. So she-must lie down.

Ailments from : Anger, vexation, smallpox, after eating, vaccination, damp, debility, debauchery.

PARTICULARS
Gastro-intestinal symptoms :
Overeating, yawning and drowsiness. Vomiting in any position except when lying on right side. Thevomitus is green, watery and frothy, Due to violent straining, there is tendency to vomit.

Tongue :
Tongue is covered with thick, white pasty coat; red streaks; very red, dry in the middle. On thetongue there are small pustules which are very painful. In most complaints this remedy is; thirstless. There is perspiration on forehead; with coldness of surface, usually the hands and feet are as cold asice; thirstless or may drink little often.

Asiatic cholera :
There is incessant diarrhoea and vomiting until the patient faints. The patient has inordinate craving for apple (Aloe). Very much sleepy after vomiting. Nausea Is better and relieved after vomiting. Vomiting in any position except when lying on right side.Diarrhoea and constipation alternate.

Respiratory System :

Antim. tart, is a wonderful medicine for many diseases of respiratory tract, whether it is pneumonia, bronchitis, asthma, etc., it matters little, if the following symptoms are present.

Causation: Exposure to damp basement and cellars. Bad effects of vaccination.

Character of troubles: Difficult suffocation in the evening and at am .compelling the patient to sit up due to aggravation of cough with less or no expectoration of mucus. LOUD RATTLING DUE TO LARGE ACCUMULATION OF MUCUS IN BRONCHI which can be heard across the entire room. In the last stage of pneumonia when the resolution takes place much more rapidly than absorption and expectoration, so that lungs are fitted with mucus and pus, this remedy will relieve. There will be marked dyspnoea and the patient gets anguished with the cough.

Concomitants: Rapid, weak and trembling pulse. The face becomes hippocratic and covered with beads of cold sweat. The patient has irresistible desire to sleep. There maybe fan like motion of alaenasi. Face becomes cyanptic, blue and pale. Tongue is coated, pasty, thick with reddened papillae and red edges, red streaks, very red, dry in the middle with extraordinary craving for apples.

Asphyxia Neonatorum :

Antim. tart, is an excellent remedy for asphyxia neonatorum. It is most useful where there is much rattling in the chest and cyariosis. Mechanical asphyxia due to foreign body in the larynx leading to dyspnoea. Child at birth is pale, breathless or gasping although the cord still pulsates. (Compare with Carbo. veg., Moschus).

Cardio-vascular system :
There may be complete cyanosis-all over—due to accumulation of deoxygenated blood as a result of congestion of lungs with mucus. In addition, there may be great precordial pain and anxiety attended with vomiting of mucus and bile in any position, execpt when lying on right side.

Skin :

Smallpox or pox-like eruptions after pustules, forming painful crusts with itching on genitals, scrotum, anus and back, witn; cyanotic condition of the face. Reddish itching rash all over the body. In case of vesicular eruptions failing to appear and convulsion setting in, a dose of this remedy will bring out the eruptions.

General modalities :

Aggravation: In damp, cold weather; lying down at night; warmth of room, change of weather in spring.

Amelioration: Cold open air, sitting upright, expectoration, lying on right side.

Relations :

Antidoted by China, Ipecac., Sepia, Hepar sulph.

Similar to; Aconite in croup. Aresenic in asthma.

Lyco. Camphor, lodum and Hepar in pneumonia.

Ver. alb, in nausea, vomiting and cold sweat.

Follows Well: Ipecac., Aresenic, Puls., Sepia and Sulphur. Antim. tart, follows Baryta carb.

chapter: 26 APIS MELLIFICA

Poison of Honey Bee BRAUNS Apium Virus

INTRODUCTION

Apis is a very useful anti-psoric medicine prepared from the poison of Honey Bee. Bee sting gives burning, stinging pain, soreness, red rose
hue and puffiness of the part which is sensitive to touch. Person becomes irritable, restless and cries or even weeps till the pain subsides.
So, also when Apis is proved on healthyhuman being, the same pathogenetic symptoms are found.

CLINICAL :

Abscess, Apoplexy, Asthma, Bright’s dise:

Carbuncle; Constipation, Cancerous
affections, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Eye troubles, Gdrigrene, Hydrocephalus, Intermittent fever, Kidney affections, Meningitis, Menstrual troubles, Rheumatism, Skin affection, Tumours, Urinary troubles, etc,

SPHERES OF ACTION

Apis acts on cellular tissues, glands, skin, brain, urinary system, heart, pleurae and serous membrane.

PATHOGENESIS

Apis is predominantly a right sided medicine. Acting on-cellular tissue, it causes oedema of skin and mucous membrane, inflammation of kideny causing oedma and even anasarca; on membranes of brain, producing hydrocephalus; on pleura, setting in
pleurisy with effusion and on serous membrane of the joint, manifesting synovitis; on glands it causes enlargement and induration.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Strumous constitution and bag like swelling under the lower eyelisds, pale, waxy, oederriatous face

Temperament: Irritable temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Apis is a hot patfent.

Miasm: Pzora is in the background.

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

. Apis is more a right sided medicine; symptoms proceed from right to left (Rhus tox.,—from left to right and from above downwards, Lachesis).

. Aversion to tight bandage like Lachesis, is very much present in Apis.

. Apis is a great pain remedy. Character of the pain is burning, stinging and soreness, suddenly migrating from one part to another (Kali bi. Lac. can., Puls.).

. Apis is generally thirstless (except during chill stage of intermittent fever). It is thirstless, especially in dropsy.

. Extremely sensitive to touch (Belladonna, Heper sulph., Lachesis, China).

. OEdema, general or local; bag-like puffy swelling under the eyes (over the eyes, Kali carb; around and eyes, Phosphorus).

. Skin alternately dry and perspiring.

. Feels suffocated; feels as if every breath would be his last, especially in dropsical condition and in-heat stage of intermittent fever.

. Craving for cold in general; cold milk, and sour things.

. Involuntary diarrhoea, with sensation as if anus was wide open (Secale cor., Phosphorus).

. Urine is scanty, frequent and painful; sudden urging; strangury. Scalds while passing urine; irritates with burning pain.

. Stupor, with sharp, sudden shrill; cries in brain diseases.

Mind : The patient is very much awkward; drops things while handling them (Bovista, Natrum mur.) Very much irritable, nervous, fidgety; hard to please. Apathy, indifference and unconsciousness are well-marked. Listless; connot think
clearly. Also connot concentrate mind when attempting to read or study. Weeping disposition; cannot help crying; discouraged and despondent (Puts.).

Sudden shrill, piercing screams, especially during brain diseases. Delirium, after suppressed scarlet (rosy) eruption. Sensation of dryness. Mental state aggravates from heat and in warm room, better in cold weather.

Ailments from : Jealousy, fright, rage, vexation, bad news, bad effects of acute exanthemata imperfectly developed and suppresed (Zincum met.), measles, urticaria.

PARTICULARS :

Head:

Apis is a very good medicine for meningitis and hydrocephalus. The indications are:
Sudden, shrill piercing screams of children while waking or sleeping (Heil., Bell., Zincum met.). Child lies in a stuporous condition, one side of the body twiching, other side motionless. Rolling head from side to side; head drawn back rigidly. A stupid state or state of semiconsciousness. Child lying with the eyes


Apis Mellifica 

partly closed, as if benumbed. Pupils contracted or dilated, eyes very red. Face flushed. Child kicks off coverings, heat of the room worsens his complaints.

Eyes:

Bag-like swelling under the lower eyelids; lids are red, oedematous, with burning and stinging pain.
Lachrymation is hot. Conjunctiva bright red and puffy. Serous exudation with oedema and sharppains. There may also be intense photophobia. The patient cannot look at or tolerate light. Keratitis with intense chemosis of ocular conjunctiva. Staphyloma of cornea following suppurative inflammation. Styes,also prevent their recurrence.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :
Tongue : Apis tongue is FIERY RED (Crot.hor., Fer. met., Pyr.). Swollen, sore and raw with vesicles. Tongue feels scalded, red, wet, trembling; cancer of the tongue.

Stomach : Thirstless, sore feeling, craving for cold milk (Rhus tox.).
Abdomen : Ascites without thirst, peritonitis; tender, sensitive to touch.

Diarrhoea :
Causation: Of drunkards, in eruptive diseases, especially if eruption is suppressed.
Stool: Stool is watery, greenish, yellowish,.slimy, contains mucus or bloody mucus, offensive
and painless; involuntary with every motion, as though the anus is wide open (Phos., Secalecor.).
Constant oozing from anus, which the patient is unconscious and unaware of. Before stool: There is much rumbling of flatus, sudden darting pain in the rectum, urging.
During stool: Griping tenesmus. Rawness and soreness in the anus with much flatus; frequent
painful urination; nausea, vomiting, backache and frontal headache.
After stool: Rawness in the anus, heat and throbbing in rectum, with sensation as if plugged;
tenesmus with passage of blood; faint and exhausted.
Concomitants: No appetite; little or no thirst. Tongue is shining, dry, red, cracked, sore, bruised
sore feeling of abdominal walls, with excessive tenderness, urine frequent, scanty or suppressed;
strangury.
Urinary system :
Incontinence of urine with great irritation of the parts. Frequent, painful; canscarcely retain the urinefor a moment.
Urine is scanty, coming only in drops; bloody, foetid, albuminous with casts. May be very dark and frothy. .
Before urination: As soon as a few drops collect in the bladder, the urge comes; constant and inffectual urge. Much straining before the urine starts coming.
During urination: Scalds severely, stinging pain, strangury, Last drop burns and smarts.

Chest :
Hoarseness, dyspnoea, breathing hurried and difficult. OEdema of larynx, feels as if he could notdraw another breath; suffocation and short cough.

Female genital organs :
OEdema of labia; relieved by cold water. Oophoritis with burning stinging pain; worse in right ovary Ovarian tumour. Great tenderness over abdomen and uterine region.

Menses:
Suppressed with cerebral and head symptoms, espcially in young girls. Metrorrhagia profuse, with heavy abdomen, faintness and stinging pain. Sense of tightness. Bearing down sensation as if menses
were to appear. For dysmenorrhoea with severe ovarian pain, Apis is a good medicine.

Skin :
Skin is waxy, pale and oedematous. Very sensitive to touch. Erysipelas with stinging, burning pain.OEdematous condition of face, especially lower eyelids, extends from right to left. (Left to right, Rhustox.).

Urticaria: Like bee stings or stings from other poisonous insects. Body covered with large, elevated white wheals, stinging, buming, pricking and smarting or itching of the skin.
Modalities:
° Aggravation: At night, by covering, application of heat or in a warm room.
© Amelioration: From cold and open air.
Boils and carbuncles: Rosy hue; oedematous condition sensitive to touch. Aggravation from heat,
covering and amelioration from cold application.
cancer: The affected part has great buring and stinging pain with extreme sensitiveness to touch and general soreness. Metastasis of cancerous affection takes place in the cellular tissue with effusion.
Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: By warmth and hot application In: general and by covering.
¢ Amelioration: By cold application.

Fever :
Apis is an excellent drug for both remittent and intermittent fever.
Intermittent fever: Chill begins at 3 p.m. with thirst (Ign). Pulse is full and rapid, small and tremblingintermittently. Chilliness from least motion, Swelling and burning of lips during entire paroxysm. After fever paroxysms there is deep sleep. After perspiration, there may be nettle-rash, also with shuddering. No thirst in sweat stage. Worse from warm and heated room and external heat.

Remittent fever: Apis is an infallible remedy for remittent fever especially when the fever assumes a typhoid form or meningitis, cerebral fever, etc, The patient is generally thirstless except during chill. Chill running over the back. Fever is continuous and low type. The patient does not like to cover up or to be touched for the body is very sensitive, Always wants open air, uncovering and cold drinks.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : Alter sleep (Lach.), closed, warm and heated room, from getting wet (Rhus tox.),touch, pressure, late in afternoon, 3p.m., right side.
Amelioration: In open air, uncovering, cold bathing, pains by coughing, walking or changing position, when sitting erect.

Relations :
Complementary to Natrum mur. Inimical to Rhus tox., in eruptive diseases.
Follows well: Arsenic and Pulsatilla.
Antidote: Cantharides, China, lodum, Digitalis.
Apis has low action and must not be changed too soon. Increased flow of urine shows that it is producing a favourable effect.

 chapter:27 APOCYNUM CANNABINUM
Indian Hemp FREITAG Apocynaceae

INTRODUCTION
Apocynum is reputed to be a very good remedy for dropsy, hydrocephalus and ascites and as such it occupies a place as important as that of Apis.

CLINICAL:
Ascites. Amenorrhoea. Cough. Dropsies. Heart affection. Hydrocephalous. Metrorrhagia. Urinary affection. Vomiting.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS :
It acts on urinary organs digestive tract and uterus. Acting on urinary organs, induces diuresis and removes the dropsical effusions It depresses the heart, kidneys and intestines relaxing sphincters. It also produces intense gastric disturbance.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :
. Excretions diminished, especially urine and sweat.
.Dropsy with thirst (Ace. Acid, without thirst, Apis Mel) but water disagrees, causing pain or is vomited ; when associated with heart, liver & kidney diseases.
. Hydrocephalas with open sutures ; stupor, sight of one eye lost, constant and involuntary motion of one arm and one leg ; forehead projected. (Helleborus—leftarm & leg,—Bryonia)
. Amenorrhoea in young girls with bloating or dropsical extension of abdomen and extremities.
.Metrorrhagia with continued or paroxysmal flow and fluid or clotted blood, nausea, vomiting, palpitation, pulse quick, feeble when moved ; vital depression, fainting when rising from pillow.
.Cough, short & dry or deep and loose during pregnancy (Con.)

Ailments from : Dropsy after typhus, typhoid, scarlatina, cirrhosis, after abuse ofquinine, alcohol.It can be compared with Acetic acid, Apis mel. and Ars, Alb. in dropsy.
Acetic Acid : It is one of the prominent medicines for dropsy associated with diabetes and gastrointestinal diseases. With dropsical condition, there is profound

Apocynum Cannabinum 73

anaemia with waxy pallor of the face. Dropsy with great thirst and debility, emaciation,sour belching, waterbrash & diarrhoea. Patient cannot sleep lying on back but restsbetter lying on belly.

Apis Mel : Oedema of the hands & feet, anasarca, ascites. Dropsy without thirst.Bag like puffy swelling under the eyes is characteristic dropsy after suppressederuptions. Urine frequent, painful, scanty.

Ars. Alb. : Anasarca with skin pale, waxy, earth colored. Dropsy with burning thirst without special desire to drink. Stomach does not seem to tolerate because it cannot assimi-late, cold water. Great thirst for cold water, drinks often, but little at a time.
Patient sleeps better on back.


 chapter: 28 ARGENTUM METALLICUM
Pure Silver HAHNEMANN The Metal

INTRODUCTION
Argentum metallicum is prepared from the precipitated Silver. It is mainly a left- sided remedy. Almost all the heavy metals have been proved to be excellent remedies after the process of potentisation and so does the Silver too. Hahnemann.was shrewd enough to understand the curative value of this metal and enunciated the process for the benefit of all generations of mankind.

CLINICAL

Brain-fag, Diabetes, Exosfosis, Heart affections, Laryngitis, Loss of voice, Male genital organs, Prolapse of uterus, Rheumatism, Throat affections, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main centres of action of this remedy are mucous membrane of throat and respiratory tract; affects all cartilages, and hence all joints and bones; cartilages of ear,nose, euslachian tube, male and female genital organs, etc.

PATHOGENESIS
It causes irritation of mucous membrane of throat and respiratory tract, producinghoarseness and loss of voice and cough; it also produces sexual weakness in male andprolapse with pain and haemorrhge in female. As it affects the cartilages, bones andjoints it produces bruised pain, tenderness and weakness.

CONSTITUTION
Make-up of the body: Usually the patient is tall and thin, with constitutional effectsof onanism and abuse of mercury.

Temperament: Irritable temperament.
Miasm: Syphilis is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

. Hoarseness of professional singers and public speakers with total loss of voice.
. Laughing excites cough (Drosera, Phosphorus, Stannum), and produces profuse mucus in larynx.
. Great weakness of the chest (Stannum).
, Raw spot over the bifurcation of trachea.
. Exhausting fluent coryza with sneezing.
. Sexual weakness with crushed pain in testicles.
. Prolapse of uterus with pain and haemorrhage.
. Bad effects of abuse of mercury, syphilis, sexual excess, and onanism, such as impotency, atrophy of penis, bruised pain in resticle, etc.
. Articular rheumatism without swelling (so called hysterical rheumatism).

PARTICULARS

Throat and respiratory tract :
There is exhausting and fluent coryza with sneezing. Hoarseness of professional singers and public speakers with total loss of voice.
Throat and larynx feel sore or raw on swallowing or on coughing. Laughing causes cough (Drosera, Phosphorus, Stannum) and produces profuse mucus in larynx, cough with easy expectoration of gelatinous viscid mucus, looking like boiled starch.
While reading the patient has to hem and.hawk to clear the throat and expectorate the mucus. Great weakness in the chest (Stannum); worse when lying on left side. Raw spot over the bifurcation of trachea; worse when using voice, talking or singing.

Modalities:
 Aggravation: When riding in a carriage; when touching or pressing upon, when talking, singing or reading aloud.

Male Genital Organs :

Causation: Due to sexual excess, onanism and abuse of mercury.
Character: There is seminal emission after onanism, almost every night, without erection. The penis is atrophied.
There is crushed pain in the testicles.
Female Genital Organs :
Prolapse : There is prolapse of uterus with pain in the left ovary and back. The pain extends forwards and downwards.
During climacteric age; along with prolapse, there will also be haemorrhage.
Unine : The colour of urine is like whey in diabetes mellitus.
General Modalities :
Aggravation: Riding in a carriage (Cocculus), when touched or pressed upon; talking, singing, treading aloud.

Relations :
Follows well after Alumina.
Similar to: Stannum in cough excited by laughing.
Antidoted by: Puls and Mercurius.


chapter: 29 ARGENTUM NITRICUM
Silver Nitrate J.O. MUELLER 

INTRODUCTION
Argentum nitricum is one of the “Monumental treasures”, and in its PATHOGENESISis, we find a wonderful remedy having tremendous influence over the human economy, particularly in the affections of the brain, nerves and_ gastro-intestinal tract, producing multiple physiological and pathological changes. This great anti-sycotic remedy is mainly indicated in those persons in whom intellectualfeatures predominate.
It has been extensively used by the Allopaths for the cauterisation of ulcers which do not yield to medicinal treatment.

CLINICAL
Acidity, Addison’s disease, Anaemia, Dyspepsia, Diarrhoea, Emaciation, Eructation, Eye affections, Flatulence, Gastric, ulcer, Gonorrhoea, Headache, Heart-burn, Locomotor ataxia, Neuralgia, Ophthalmia neonatorum, Paraplegia, Paralysis, Ricket, Spinal irritation, Throat affection. Ulcerated tongue, Warts, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts on brain, spinal cord, nerves, blood, mucous membranes such as of eyes, throat, stomach, urethra, etc. periosteum, bones, kidney, liver, gastrointestinal tract alsoare susceptible to the action of this great remedy.

PATHOGENESIS
It produces hyperaesthetic and anaesthetic condition of the nerves, i.e. neuro-sycosis.Kidney liver and other glands show degeneration. It also causes disturbed digestion,diarrhoea, etc. The blood becomes fluid and darker. Haemoglobin is diminshed, setting in defective oxidation and anaemia. Mucous membranes are inflamed.

CONSTITUTION
Adapted to hysterical nervous person with vivid imagination, having carbo-nitrogenoid or hydrogenoid constitution.

Physical make-up: Cachectic, scrawny, withered, dried up, old looking young persons,having history of unusual or long continued mental exertion.

Temperament: Bilious temperament, Very irritable and becomes angry easily.

Argentum Nitricum 77

Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient. Wants everything cold, which gives relief, excepting the gastric symptoms which aggravate.

Miasm: Argentum nitricum covers all the three miasms. It is, however, mainly sycotic and syphilitic with Psora in the background.

Diathesis: Neuro-sycotic.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Emaciation progressing every year which is most marked in the lower extremities.
. Defective co-ordination of muscles (Gels.) with trembling in the affected parts.
. Great apprehension, especially when getting ready for church, opera, examination, public meeting or any other, engagement and at that time   DIARRHOEA SETS IN (GELS.). It is a good remedy for examination funk.
. Sensation of a splinter in throat, uterus and other parts of the body (Hepar sulph.,Nitric acid).
. Chilly when uncovered, yet feels smothered if warapped up, craves fresh air (Puls.).
. Desire for sugar, sweets (Lyco., Cina, Sulpur), for salt (Carbo veg., Nat. mur.,Phos.).
. Great longing for fresh air.
. Belching accompanies most gastric ailments.
. Urine passes unconsiously day and night (Causticum).
. Impotence, erection fails when action is attempted.
. Chronic laryngitis of singers. The high notes cause cough.
. Great weakness of lower extremities with trembling. Cannot walk with eyes closed(Alumina).
. Coition is painful in both sexes, followed by bleeding from vagina (Nitric acid).
. Post-diptheritic paralysis (Gels.).
. Acute or chronic diseases from unusual or long continued mental exertion.
. Metrorrhagia in young widows; in sterility; with nervous erethism at chage of life(Lach.).
. Arg. nit. is an excellent remedy for epilepsy caused by fright or occcurring at menstrual period. Pupils dilate days and hours before, attack.   After attack thepatient becomes restless with trembling.

 Mind : There is GREAT APPREHENSION when getting ready to go to church or opera, examination or any other important engagement and at that time diarrhoea sets in. we There is frequent loss of memory; makes frequent faults in speech because he cannot find the right words.
Mental confusion and dizziness with tendency to fall sidewards. Vertigo on closing the eyes.
The patient is very impulsive. Does everything hurriedly, so much so that he evendrinks with great haste.
He has great fear of projecting buildings on street corners which creates a sensation as if it would fall over him. The sight of height makes him dizzy.

Suicidal tendency prevails on him. When crossing high places or bridge or looking out through a window, the impulse comes on him to jump down from it. Reserved, sad, taciturn with dullness of head. Feels as if a cloud hung over him. sxime passes very slowly (Alumina, Medorrhinum, Can Indica). Very excitable and easily angered which brings on pain in head chest, etc.
Ailments from : Apprehension and fear; eating ice and ice-cream; sugar and sugarcandy. Mental stress and strain, tobacco, etc.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation: Headache of literary men, habitual or gastric in origin and from dancing. Also caused by prolonged mental exertion.

Location: In the frontal eminence or temple.
Sensation: OF EXPANSION of the head and face. Character of pain. Pressing, screwing pain in he frontal eminence or temples.

Modalities: Aggravation from mental exertion, during menstruation, bright light and relieved by sitting in a dark room tight ban daging, open air, cold application and complete mental rest.

EYES :
Causation: Gonorrhoea, catarrhal condition, fine needle work and eye strain.

Character: Argentum nitricum has got many eye troubles such as Ophthalmia neonatorum in young infants who contacted gonorrhoea during the passage through the birth canal of the infected mother there is profuse purulent discharge, cornea is opaque, ulcerated lids are sore, thick and swollen which agglutinate in the morning.

Granular conjunctivitis; scarlet red, like raw beef, eye strains from needle works.
Dilated pupil, with dimness of vision and intense photo-phobia. The inner canthi, are swollen and congested. Paretic condition of the ciliary muscles; defective accommodation.

Modalities:
* Aggravation: Worse in a warm room, sitting by the side of fire and bright light.
¢ Amelioration: From cold application and in a dark room.

Throat :

Inflamed, with thick mucus discharge and feeling of rawness and soreness with splinter-like sensation in the throat; during swallowing, tingling with sensation of hair in the throat with hoarseness in the

evening.
Laryngitis of singers and public speakers.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms : ;
The stomach is full of flatulence as if it would burst. Air rushes out with great violence both ways without any relief. Flatulent dyspepsia.
Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: From sweet, ice cream, emotion and lying on left side.
¢ Amelioration: From eructation, pressure and abstaining from sweet and cold food.

Diarrhoea :
Argentum nitricum has got two kinds of diarrhoea, viz. (1) Nervous diarrhoea and (2) Diarrhoea due to gastro-intestinal disorders.
Nervous diarrhoea : It sets in as a result of any mental emotion, nervousness, etc. There is great apprehension when the patient is ready to go to church or opera or to appear for the examination, or before public or any other engagement, suddenly diarrhoea comes in (Gels.). Although there is no particular striking characteristic feature about the stool, there is watery stool with intolerable
offensiveness and urging. But immediately the person starts performing the task for which he was preparing, the diarrhoea disappears and he is perfectly well and accomplishes the assigntment quite satisfactorily.

 Diarrhoea due to gastro-intestinal disorders.
Causation: Sugar, candy, sweets, milk, salt, etc. After weaning in children, mental shock, after long mental exertion.

Sensation: As if the abdomen would burst with wind.
Character of stool: Stool is watery, green, or turning to green when left on a diaper, looking like chopped spinach, with much noisy flatus. Stool bloody, slimy, watery with green flakes and severe
tenesmus; lot of casts are passed with the stool.

Modalities:

* Aggravation: At night, from sugar, salt, starchy food, ice; ice-cream, mental exertion, afterweaning, from alcohol and lying on left side.
* Amelioration : From lying on right side, from eructation, from fresh air and from pressure.
Concomitants; Almost all the symptoms are associated with nausea and vomiting of glairy mucus.

Nervous Symptoms :

Locomotor-ataxia with lightning like pain in the affected part. Convulsion followed by greatrestlessness with trembling of the body. Staggering and paralytic’ heaviness of lower limbs. Hysteria with complete but temporary blindness, Numbness in forearm at night. A kind of numb sensitiveness of the arms—a hyperaesthetic anaesthetic state; increased sensitiveness to touch but diminished sense of distinguishing sensations. Rigidity in calves with great weakness.


80 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Cannot walk with eyes closed due to loss of balance. Walks and stands unsteadily after exhaustive mental labour, particularly when he thinks himself unobserved. Epilepsy caused by fright, during
menstruation and at night with dilated pupils, for a day or two before the attack, with loss of vision.

Baby :
Sycotic baby, sickly, WITHERED APPEARANCE with; premature aged expression in the face. There is emaciation all over the body, particularly the LEGS, with history of gonorrhoea in the parents, emaciation progressing every year.
The baby craves for sweets which cause diarrhoea. Green diarrhoea like chopped spinach, afterweaning or green watery diarrhoea or turning green when left on diaper.
General Modalities :
Aggravation: Cold air, cold food, eating sugar, sugar candy, ice-cream, imaginations and prolonged mental exertions, warmth in general, lying of left side and bright light.
Amelioration: Open air, bathing with cold water, cold application, tight bandaging, dark room, eructation.
Relations :
Antidoted by: Natrum mur., particularly for the bad effects of cauterisation with silver nitrate.
Antidote to: Nit.ac., Sep., Puls., Calc. carb.
Inimical to: Coffea.


chapter : 30 ARNICA MONTANA
Leopard's Bane HAHNEMANN Compositae

INTRODUCTION
Arnica grows all over the world in the mountain region. Before proving. Arnica plant was used in any injury from fall with astonishing results. So it can be said to be the traumatic par excellence. Trauma in all its varieties and effects, recent or remote, is met by Arnica, more than by any other single drug.

CLINICAL
Abscess, Apoplexy, Boils, Brain affection,Bronchitis, Bruises, Carbuncle, Chest affections, Diabetes, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Ecchymosis. Eye affections, Fever, Haematemesis, Haematuria, Headache, Heart affection, Injury, Labour, Meningitis, Paralysis, Rheumatism, Rheumatic fever, Sprain, Suppuration, Typhoid, Urinary affection, Skin affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
The Chief action of Arnica is on blood and blood vessels particularly on capillaries. It is generally believed to possess the. power of absorbing blood.

PATHOGENESIS
By its action upon the blood, it produces anaemia, tendency to haemorrhage,capillary stasis, ecchymosis and defective nutrition. Arnica causes reabsorption of extravasated blood, prevents septic condition and recovery of the parts. On the muscular, serous and cellular tissues and tendons, it produces condition similar to those resulting from blunt injuries.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Sanguine, plethoric persons, lively expression and very red face,who are disposed to cerebral congestion.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.
Temperament: Nervous temperament

Miasm: Psora is in the background

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. SORE, LAME, BRUISED FEELING ALL THROUGH THE BODY AS IF BEATEN,
. The patient is very much oversensitive to pain.
. EVERYTHING ON WHICH THE PATIENT LIES SEEMS too hard.
. Heat of upper part of the body and coldness of lower part.
. Tendency to small painful boils one after another.
. Stupor with involuntary discharge of faeces and urine.
. The patient bleeds easily; blood vessels seem to be relaxed and, therefore, extravasation is easy.
. Arnica is specially suited to cases where injury, however, remote, seems to have caused the present troubles. Master Hahnemann feels that this remedy is most suited to chronic cases.
. Arnica causes and cures haemorrhage of any kind; haemorrhage into the tissues of internal organs or the skin.
. Concussion and contusions, result of shock or injury without laceration of soft parts prevents suppuration and septic condition and promotes absorption.
. Local application of Arnica produces extraordinary growth of hair and checks falling of hair. .

 Mind : The patient remains unconscious; when spoken to, answers correctly, and completely, but immediately unconsciousness and delirium return (Phos. acid.; falls
asleep in the midst of answer—Baptisia). The patient is in a stuporous condition with involuntary discharge of stool and urine, specially typhoid. Indifferent to everything. Complete inability to perform continuous active work. He is morosed,
quiet, wants to be alone, with depression of spirit and absence of mind. Low muttering delirium or complete stupor in malarial or typhoid fever. Fears of being struck or even touched by those coming near him. Sudden fear of death rousing him up at night, with cardiac distress.

 Ailments from. Bad effects of mechanical injuries even if received years ago, falls, blow, concussion, contusion, hard work, spirituous liquor, charcoal vapour, fright and anger.

PARTICULARS
Eye:

For conjunctival and retinal haemorrhage with extravasation and intra ocular haemorrhage from injuries or cough. Arnica is an infallible remedy.
Gastrointestinal symptoms :
Stomach : Longing for vinegar. Distaste for milk and meat. Pain in stomach during eating. Belching and eructation are very much foul, putrid, like rotten eggs. Putrid smell from mouth.
Constipation :
¢ Causation: Due to enlarged prostate or retroverted uterus.
© Sensation: As if rectum is loaded, stool will not come out.
© Character: Ribbon-like stool.
Dysentery : Great straining and tenesmus.
© Character of stool: Very much offensive, brown, bloody, putrid and involuntary. Fruitless
urging. Long interval between two stools.
.® Concomitant: Dysentery with ischuria.
Urine : Involuntary urination; involuntary evacuation from bladder; vesical tenesmus, with very painful micturition. Ischuria during dysentery.
Retention and incontinence of urine after labour (Hyos., Op.).:

* Causation: Results from blow, fall, contusion, traumatic and mechanical injuries. Injuries from blunt instruments.

* Sensation: SORE, LAME, BRUISED FEELING ALL OVER THE AFFECTED PARTS. -
¢ Pain: Very much painful; sensitive to touch.
¢ Look of the skin: The affected parts become blue and black with extravasation of blood.
There may also be injury to conjunctiva and retina due to coughing, with extravasation of blood (Ruta. Ledum) and sore, lame, bruised feeling in the eye.
After difficult labour, there is soreness of part with retention or incontinence of urine. In acute case of injury, if Arnica is given when above mentioned symptoms are found:
“It controls haemorrhage.
It re-absorbs extravasation of blood.
It prevents suppuration and septic condition.
It prevents post-partum haemorrhage and puerperal complication.”

 Chronic injury: In chronic cases of injury, even if received years ago resulting in tremors, articular rheumatism, paretic and paralytic condition of parts, Arnica is infallible.
Consequent upon chronic injury, especially concussion of brain, received years ago, there is involuntary evacuation from bladder; involuntary faeces and urine.
Rheumatism:
Type: Ascending type of rheumatism (Ledum), (Descending type-Cactus, Kalmia).
Character of pain: oversensitive to touch, cannot bear pain. There is great fear of being touched or struck by persons coming near him. Pain in the back and limbs as if bruised or beaten. Cannot walk
erect on account of bruised pain in pelvic organs.
Modalities: Aggravation from touch and amelioration by lying down.
Skin :
Causation: Trauma or any mechanical injury.
Location: Underneath the skin; ecchymosis.
Sensation: SORE, LAME, BRUISED FEELING OF THE AFFECTED PARTS: very much sensitive to
touch.Tendency to small painful boils, which come one after another.

Fever :
Generally indicated in typhoid fever.

Symptoms during fever. Sore, lame, bruised feeling all over the body. Great restlessness (Rhus tox.,Pyrogen, Baptisia). EVERYTHING ON WHICH THE PATIENT LIES FEELS TOO HARD and that is why he becomes restless. Patient consequently moves from place to place in search of a soft spot.
During fever, there is low muttering delirium. The patient lies unconscious. Whenever anything is asked, he answers correctly and in-full, but unconsciousness and delirium at once return (Phosphoric acid—falls asleep in the midst of an answer, Baptisia). The patient says that there is nothing wrong withhim and there is no matter with him. During fever, there is involuntary evacuation from bowels and bladder.
In fever, it differs from Baptisia. In Baptisia fever, there is also sore, lame, bruised-feeling. In whatever position the patient lies, parts resting upon the bed feel sore, lame, bruised and hot, the bed feels hard as found in Arnica. In Baptisia, there is low muttering delirium, but delirium returns in the midst of the answer. Whereas in Arnica, the patient answers correctly and in full and then the delirium
returns (Phos. ac.). Offensiveness of discharge is of superlative degree in Baptisia e.g., stool, urine, sweat, etc. and even breath; all are horribly offensive, but not so much in Arnica.

In meningeal fever, when there is heat of upper part of the body and coldness of lower, after mechanical or traumatic injuries, from fall, concussion of brain, etc., Arnica can be thought of.
General Modalities :

Aggravation: From least touch, motion, rest, in damp cold weather.
Amelioration: From lying down.

Relations :
Complementary to Aconite, Hyper., Rhus tox.
Similar to: Bap., China, Phyt., Pyr., Rhus tox, Ruta arid Staphisagria for soreness as if bruised.
Follows well: Acon., Apis, Ham., Ipec. and Ver, alb.
Followed Well by: Sulph. ac.


cheapter : 31 ARSENICUM ALBUM
White Oxide of Arsenic HAHNEMANN 

INTRODUCTION
ARSENIC patient can be compared to a RACE HORSE as PULSATILLA to a SHEEP and ANTIM CRUD to a SWINE. Arsenic is a deadly poison. The fatal dose is 2-4 grains, Arsenic was used as a medicine from ancient times. Hughes says that Arsenic was used in China long ago and in India for cutaneous affection, neuralgia, chorea and _ cholera. Physiological dose will produce vomiting,purging and great prostration due to excessive secretion from gastro-intestinal tract. It produces feeble pulse. In short, it gives the full picture of a cholera patient or you may
imagine a dying man with burning sensation, continuously sipping warm drinks and wants to be carried from one place to another, with a cadaverous odour from his body. Kent even says that from the very odour itself you may recognise an Arsenic patient as soon as you enter his room.

CLINICAL
Abscess, Alcoholism, Anaemia, Asthma, Abdominal disorders, Cancerous affections, Carbuncle, Cholera, Cough, Delirium, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Duodenal ulcer, Fever, Gangrene, Gastric ulcer, Gout, Headache, Heart affection, Haemorrhoids, Kidney affection, Locomotor ataxia, Lung affection, Measles, Menstrual disorders, Pleurisy, Pneumonia, Rheumatism, Rickets, Skin affection, Throat affection, Vomiting, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Main seats of action of Arsenic are mind, nerves, mucous membrane, joints, Periosteum, liver, spleen, lymphatics, blood, lungs, skin, stomach and alimentray canal. Arsenic acts more promptly on vegetarians than on non-vegetarians (rev.—Nux vy; All sat).

PATHOGENESIS
Arsenic is a poison and causes constant and violent irritation to all tissues such as:—
. Acting on gastro-intestinal tract, it produces a picture like Cholera Asiatica.
. It attacks blood, causing septic changes i.e, exanthemata, ecchymosis, petechial haemorrhage, etc. .
. It attacks veins, varices which burn like fire, especially at night.
. It attacks serous membranes causing copious serous effusion.
. It attacks glands which indurate and suppurate.
. It causes inflammatory swelling with burning lancinating pains.
. It attacks periosteum.
. It attacks joints causing paleness, swelling, burning, pain, etc.
. It also causes general anasarca; skin pale, waxy or earth-coloured.
. It causes rapid emaciation.
. It also causes ulcerations which bum like fire, producing pains and dischargeswhich may be scanty, putrid and offensive.
. The skin is irritated producing violent itching and burning followed by eruptions,ulcerations, etc.

CONSTITUTION
 
 Physical make-up: The patient is lean, thin, debilitated having hippocratic face, dirtyand waxy look of the skin.
 Temperament: Very fastidious. Wants everything neat, clean and in order.
 Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient. There is internal chilliness and so the patient craves heat, excepting in outer head.
 Miasm: Arsenic has a combination of Psora, Syphilis and Sycosis.
 Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

. Arsenic patient has GREAT FEAR OF DEATH. Thinks that he is incurable, the disease is fatal and it is useless to take medicines.
. Mentally restless, but physically too weak and exhausted to move about. It is one of the trio of restlessness (others being Aconite for mental   restlessness and Rhus tox. for Physical restlessness). Just like a horse an Arsenic patient is always restless.
. Burning pain relieved by heat except in head. This is very much peculiar and characteristic of Arsenic. Kent says that the patient wants to    keep his body in a hot room but head in refrigerator.
. Great prostration is persistently present, sinking of strength out of proportion to a degree of illness.
. Gastric derangements such as diarrhoea, vomiting, etc., are due to food poisoning from spoiled eggs, fish or meat, decayed food, alcohol, ice   cream, etc.
. Complaints return periodically (usually annually), So it is a useful drug in intermittent fever.
. All discharges are acrid, scanty, putrid, dark and offensive with cadaverous odour(rotten egg—Sulphur; rotten cheese—Hepar Sulph; sour milk—  Calc. carb.; likefumes of sulphur Phosphorus).
.Thirst for small quantity of water at short intervals in acute states but in chronic state there is no thirst. For acute or chronic ptomaine    poisoning, Arsenic is an excellent remedy.
. Cannot bear the smell or sight of food (Colchicum, Sepia, Stannum),
. All symptoms are aggravated at MID-DAY AND MIDNIGHT. (1 to 2 a.m./p.m.) and ameliorated by heat.

 Mind : Arsenic patient exhibits peculiar and striking mental symptoms which ar as follows:—
.The patient is depressed, irritable, EXTREMELY RESTLESS AND ANXIOUS. 
.There is great FEAR OF DEATH or thinks that his diasease is incurable; fear of death is more marked when alone or when going to bed.
.He is extremely fastidious. Wants everything in order, neat and clean. Even a picture hanging on the wall slightly tilted must be adjust properly. So Arsenic patient is known as “A gold-headed cane patient.” Weak memory due to confusion in head.
.He suffers so much that he decides to commit suicide. Aversion to meet people, even with acquainted ones because he imagines that he has offended them, but knows not how, when and where; yet fears to be alone. Sad, tearful and anxious mood. .
The patient is very much depressed,melancholic, full of despair and indifference.
Still he is very ANXIOUS, FEARFUL, RESTLESS AND FULL OF ANGUISH. Yet he is very irritable, sensitive, peevish and easily angered. Although mentally very restless, he is physically too weak to move. Dreams are full of sorrow and fear; dreams of thunderstorm, fire, darkness and death.

. Ailments from, chill, in winter, taking ice, ice-cream, cold fruits, decayed food or animal matter whether by inoculation, olfaction or ingestion, poor diet, continued drainage of body fluids, anaemia, abuse of alcohol, sour beer, bad sausage, strong cheese, ptomaine poisoning, tobacco, abuse of quinine, iodine, climbing mountains and sea bathing.

PARTICULARS
Headache :
Causation: Exposure to cold, taking ice cream, decayed food, loss of vital fluid, abuse of alcohol, etc.
Location: According to Kent, Arsenic has periodical headache in all parts of head: even forehead is congested.
Character of pain: Headache with throbbing and burning. Occipital headache is so severe as to make the patient dazed, feels as if the skull would burst. Sensation as if there is vibration and looseness in brain. Head is hot. Headache every two weeks.

Modalities: Headache is aggravated by light, motion, commences from 1-3 p.m., goes upto mid-night. Relieved by cold application, in dark room, lying with head on pillow.

Concomitants: Nausea and vomiting; always chilly except in the head, during intermittent fever, head symptoms alternate with physical symptoms.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Mouth : Unhealthy mouth with easily bleeding gums and offensive breath. Sore lips and ulcers in the mouth and eruption on the lips. Aphthae in mouth with foetid and bloody saliva.

Tongue : Blackish, brown, dry, coated white, black or brown with red streak in the middle, with req papillae. Dryness of the mouth, violent thirst yet drinks little at a time but quite often.

Throat : Throat is ulcerated, swollen and oedematous. Dryness with soreness, scraping and burning, Swallowing is very difficult and painful.

Stomach :

Causation; Taking ice-cream, cold fruits, decayed food or animal matter, sour beer, bad sausage, strong cheese, ptomaine poisoning, etc.

* Character: Food has no taste. Cannot bear the smell or sight of food (Colchicum, Sepia, Stannum). There is burning pain with intense heat in the pit of stomach and pressure in stomach, especially after eating. Great anxiety about the stomach, becomes restless and-rolls-about. Nausea and vomiting of entire food and water as soon as it touches the stomach due to inflammation and irrit-ation of
the mucous membranes—from Slightest irritation to the most destructive gastritis, gastro-enteritis with burning pain in the stomach and dry mouthy. Vomiting as soon as anything is taken; vomiting of both food and water (food is retained in Bismuth). Vomiting black bile and blood. The vomitus is dark,offensive, scanty and putrid. Vomiting with diarrhoea followed by great prostration. Spasmodic colic with
sensation as if the intestines become twisted with burning in abdomen. The patient is restless with fear of death; troubles are more during mid-day and midnight. Loathing of food in general.

Cholera :
Causation: During cholera time, taking ice-cream, cold frutis, decayed food, sour beer, bad sausage, ptomaine poisoning, etc.

Character of stool: Dark or black, watery, very offensive rice-watery stool with intense vomiting and profound debility. Corrosive stool, cutting pain in bowels with tenesmus. Burning in anus and rectum during and after stool. Small, offensive and dark stool with sudden and rapid prostration. Diarrhoea worse at night, especially at mid-Might, from 12-2 a.m.

Diarrhoea : After eating or drinking. Stool is yellowish, black, offensive, watery and bloody. Very offensive, having cadaverous odour, pain and corrosiveness, followed by great prostration. During diarrhoea, the patient is very much ANGUISHED, RESTLESS AND HAS FEAR OF DEATH.

Haemorrhoids : With stitching pain, when walking or sitting, but not at stool, preventing sitting or sleeping. Burning pain relieved by heat,

Respiratory system :
Asthma : Asthma comes on or aggravated by suppressed eruptions, cold things and cold food.The patient is very much worried about himself with anguish. He is unable to lie down for fear of suffocation: must sit or bend forward and abduct arms for relief (Lie down and abduct arms—Psorinum). Wheezing respiration with cough and frothy expectoration. There is darting pain through upper I/3rd of right lung which is worse after cold drink or cold food The sputum is scanty and frothy,


Arsenicum Album 89

offensive and dark. There is loss of breath ;  -rdiately after lying down: whistiling sound due toconstriction of trachea. Hering says that there will be tightness of chest as if bound with koup
Modality: Aggravation from 12-2 a.m./p.m.
Relieved by heat in general.
Cardio-vascular system : Palpitation after, suppression of foot sweat (Tonsils—Baryta carb.).
Heart beats more rapidly and stronger when lying on back. Hering says that Arsenic will be of great use in Angina Pectoris. Sudden tightness of heart, agonising precordial pain. Pain goes to back, occiput and neck. Angina pain is worse from 12-2a.m. Pulse is thread like, incompressible and weak.

Skin : Skin has white pasty look, with painful black eruption, There may be pustules, vesicles, disquamation from head to foot. Burning and itching, followed by pain after scratching. Pimples burn violently causing intolerable anguish. Dropsy, local or general, with disproportionate weakness. Black vesicles cause burning pain. Carbuncles, boils and abscesses with very offensive discharge which are hot
and burning, but relieved by hot application. Cancers with great pain. In gangrene, burning pain is relieved by heat.

Intermittent fever :
  Type: Quotidian, tertian, quartun, double tertian. Anticipates every 14 days, every year. Remittent and relapsing typhoid and malarial fevers    due to abuse of quinine derivatives.
  Time: Afternoon paroxysms (1-2a.m. arid 12-2p.m.)
  Prodrome: There may be sleepiness during night before paroxysms. Yawning and stretching, malaise, debility, weakness, headache and vertigo.     Chill without thirst, alternates with heat. Nails and lips burn during chill.
  Heat: Dry heat with thirst; inclination to uncover.
  Sweat: There will be sweat at the end of fever which relieves pain; cold and clammy sweat, sour and offensive smell. Thirst during sweat stage.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Periodically after mid-day and mid-night 12-2 a.m./p.m:, cold food and drinks,exertion, lying on affected side with head low.
Amelioration: From heat in general (except head, which is temporarily relieved by cold); hot drinks, hot application, motion, elevating the head, company and rest.

Relations :
Complementary to Sulphur, Thuja, Rhus tbx., Carbo veg., Phos and Secale cor.
Antidotes; Camphor, Carbo veg., Graphites, China, Hepar, Ipecac and Nux vom.

chapter :32 ARSENICUM IODATUM
Iodide of Arsenic As 

INTRODUCTION
This medicine was originally used by H.Nankivell, on analogical grounds, in case of Phthisis. It has had a short, independent proving, and symptoms observed on patients have increased the pathogenesis. In Ars. lod. the conditions resemble more closely those of Arsenic than those of lodum.

CLINICAL :
Angina  Pectoris. _ Breast-tumour _ of. Bronchitis. _ Cancer-Catarrh. Consumption.Debility. Diarrhoea. Epithelioma. Eczema. Hay fever. Heart-affection of. Laryngitis. Liver-affection of. Otorrhoea. Pneumonia. Psoriasis. Syphilisis.

SYPHERES OF ACTION :
Especially it acts upon mucous membr-anees of respiratory tract, digestive tract, and also acts upon heart, glands and skin.

CONSTITUTION :
No particular look or physical make up is present is Ars-Iod. 
Relation with heat & cold : Sensitive to heat & cold. Miasm : Psora & Syphilis in thebackground. Diathesis : Tubercular diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :
. Discharges are irritating, Corrosive, profuse & greenish yellow.
. Chronic nasal Catarrh : Thin, watery excoriating dis-charge from anterior & posterior nares.
. Enlarged scrofulous glands.
. Recurrent fever with drenching night sweats, profound prostration, emaciation with rapid feeble pulse.
. Marked exfoliation of skin in large scales, leaving a raw exuding surface beneath.
. Epithelioma of the lip.
. Cancer of breast after ulceration has set in.

Mind : 
    There is anxiety & irritability during all complaints. Fancy illusions and delusions about dead people. Marked mental weakness with fear of insanity, of misfortune, of people. He is impatient. 9) Ailments from : Study (headache).

PARTICULARS
Respiratory symptoms :
Nose : It is a very useful remedy for chronic nasal catarrh, hay fever, etc. There is irritation and tingling in nose with constant desire for sneezing. Discharge is thin, watery, irritating excoriating
from anterior and posterior nares. In chronic nasal Catarrah, the nose is swollen, membrane is sore and excoriated with profuse, thick yellow discharge. Modality : Nasal symptoms are aggravated by
sneezing. Throat: Especially indicated in diptheria, tonsillitis, and chronic follicular pharyngitis. There is marked burning in Pharynx with dryness. Difficult swallowing, foetid breath, enlarged swollen glands are
the other indications in throat complaints.

Chest: Dry hacking cough with little expectoration. Cough is also loose, croupy, suffocating & spasmodic, Expectoration is copious greenish—yellow and purulent. Asthma from 11 p.m. until 2 a.m.
It is indicated in tuberculosis when there is hoarse, racking cough with profuse, purulent expectoration. Debility, emaciation, tendency to diarrhoea and fever with night sweats are present.

Modalities : Aggravation from motion, talking, in warm room.
Skin : It has many types of eruptions on the skin, such as, boils, pustules, rash and scales, moist eruptions, eczema, itching eruptions, herpes and psoriasis. Skin is dry, scaly and itching. There is
marked exfoliation of skin in large scales, leaving a raw exuding surface beneath. Acne hard, shotty, indurated base with pustule at apex. Eczeme of the beard, watery, oozing itching & worse by washing.
Relations :
Compare : Tuberculinum, Antim-lod.
Antidote : Bry. Complementary: Phos.
N.B.: Ars. lod. should not be given in empty stomach.
ARTEMISIA VULGARIS
Mugwort Compositae

CLINICAL:
Catalepsy. Chorea. Convulsions. Epilepsy.Somnambulism.
Like the other Artemisias this remedy has aprominent place in convulsive diseases. It is principal remedy for epilepsy, catalepsy, spasmodic twitchings as is seen in chorea, hysterical fits,
eclampsia and convulsion of various types such asoccur in hydrocephalus, teething etc. Its indications in epilepsy are as follows :

1) Epilepsy after fright or grief or bad news, afterblow on the head, after masturbation and with menstrual disturbances or with teething.
2) Attacks frequently repeated, then followed by a long J, interval of rest.
3) Several attacks of epilepsy in the same day.
4) Epilepsy without aura.
5) Attack accompanied or followed by profuse offensive sweat; by seminal ejaculations.
6) Fever : Profuse sweat, having a peculiar fetid, cadaverous or garlic like odour is a characteristic of the remedy.

In epilepsy Artemisia Vulgaris can be compared with Aethusa Cyn., Bufo., Cal.Garb., Cicuta V., Cuprum Met., Lachesis, Silicea., Aethusa Cynapium—Useful in
eases of children indicated by epileptic spasms with clenched thumbs, red face, eyes turned downwards, pupils fixed and dilated ; foam at the mouth, jaws locked ; pulse small, hard quick. After attack sleepiness & prostration,

Bufo : Aura starts from sexual organs or from solar plexus. Epilepsy from masturbation or self abuse. The attacks usually occur during sleep at night, during coition and at the time of menses.

Calearea Carb : It is useful in cases of children particularly in epilepsy occurring in scrofulous diathesis, Aura may begin in solar plexus and move upward or downward into
the uterus and limbs. In some cases aura causes a feeling as if a mouse was running oD the arm.

Cicuta.Virosa : It is indicated by strange movements of head and trunk, violent distortion of face, locked jaw, bluish countenance, protrusion of eyes, vomiting, a weak
and scarcely perceptible pulse, great venous congestion of the abdominal viscera and convulsion occurring during the act of parturition. Epileptic spasms from concussion of
brain, of teething children or from worms.

Cuprum Met : Epilepsy from a fall or blow upon the head ; from getting wet, from bad effects of re-percussed eruptions. Aura begins in knees and ascends. Aggravation at
night during sleep. Fits return at regular intervals, about new moon. Better by cold washing. There may be flexor type of cramps.

Lachesis : Epilepsy comes on during sleep ; from loss of vital fluids ; onanism, jealousy.

Silicea : Nocturnal epilepsy especially about the time of the new moon.

Arg. Nit : For days or hours before the attack the pupils are dilated and after the attack the patient is very restless and has trembling of hands.

Kali Brom : Congenital, Syphilitic, tubercular ; usually a day or two before menses ; at new moon, headache follows attack.

PARTICULARS :

Epilepsy

Causations : Fright, grief, badnews, blow on the head, after masturbation, teething or with menstrual discharges.
Before : Epilepsy without aura.
During : Attacks frequently repeated, then followed by a long interval of rest.
After : Attack accompanied or followed by profuse offensive sweat : by seminal ejaculations.
Eyes :
Pain and blurring of vision, better rubbing worse using eyes.
Coloured light produces dizziness.


cheapter:33 ARUM TRIPHYLLUM

Indian Turnip DR. JEANS Araceae

INTRODUCTION

Arum Triphyllum is the most important of the Arums. It is one of the sovereign remedies
for an acute cold. It should not be given in low potency or repeated often as bad effects often follow.

CLINICAL:

Aphonia. Coryza. Diphtheria, Headache.Mouth sore, scarlatina. Typhoid. Clergyman’s sore throat. Glandular swellings. Tongue cracked.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS :

It prominently affects left side. It has marked action on mucous menbranes of mouth, throat, larynx. It also acts on kidneys, brain, blood and skin. It is an irritant poison causing excitability & irritability of mind and body. It causes inflammation of the mucous surfaces and destruction of the tissue. Discharges are acrid causing painful, sore, rawness & burning of parts.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :
1) Constant picking at the nose until it bleeds, boring with the finger into the side of the nose.
2) Pick lips until they bleed, corners of mouth cracked & bleeding.
3) Acrid, ichorous discharges, excoriating mucous surfaces.
4) Painfully sore, raw and burning of parts.
5) Nose feels stopped, inspite of the watery discharge.
6) Aphonia complete, after exposure to northwest winds (Aco., Hep.) and from singing (Arg. Nit., Caust.)
7 ) Fluent Coryza with nostrils raw.
8) Children refuse food & drink on account of soreness of mouth & throat.
9) Tongue and buccal cavity raw and bleeding with profuse acrid salivation.
10) Ailments from—Exposure to northwest wind, getting cold, overuse of voice.
11) Mind—Children excessively cross & stubborn. They are nervous, restless and irritable. Persistently boring into nose or picking at lips, fingers at one spot until it is sore or bleeds.

PARTICULARS
Mouth : Mouth painfully raw, sore and inflamed. Corners of mouth cracked and bleeding. There isprofuse acrid secretion of saliva corroding the mucous menbranes of mouth. Patients pick and bore into raw bleeding surface though very painful. He screams with pain but keeps up the boring, This is key notesymptom in diphtheria, scarlatina & typhoid. Tongue cracked and bleeding. Children refuse food and
drink on account of soreness of mouth and throat.

Nose : Arum Triphyllum is one of the important remedies in acute- cold when the discharge is acrid and fluent. Stuffy nose inspite of the watery discharge, patient must breathe through the mouth. Sneezing worse at night. Constant picking at the nose until it bleeds. Boring with the finger into the side of the nose is another characteristic of this remedy.

Throat : Throat is raw, sore, painful on clearing or coughing. Patient cannot swallow. It is medicine for cleargyman’s sore throat or sore throat on one who speaks a great deal, orators, singers, actors. Voice is hoarse, uncertain, uncontrollable, chang'rg continually. Complete aphonia after exposure to north west winds and from singing.

Modality: Aggravation : Talking, speaking, or singing.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : Overuse of voice, talking, singing, northwest wind, heat, lying down, at night.

Relations :
Useful after—Hep, & Nit. Acid in hoarse, croupy cough. After—Caust. & Hep. in morning hoarseness & deafness and in scarlatina.


cheapter 34 ASAFOETIDA
Narthex asafoetida FRANZ Umbelliferae

INTRODUCTION
In common language it is called the Devil’s Dung, a name very apporpriate because of the very
offensive smell. It was introduced in our Materia Medica by Franz in 1822 and Hahnemann himself contributed to the proving. Its
influence is most marked on the nervous system producing hysteria, chorea & neuralgia. It is suited to nervous, hysterical & syphilitic people.

CLINICAL:
Asthma. Bone-diseases of. Chorea. Dyspepsia. Flatulence. Hysteria. Iritis. Lactation- diseases of. Neuralgia. Ozaena. Syphilis. Ulcers.

1) Hysteria from suppression of habitual discharge such as sudden checking of long standing expectoration or of chronic diarrhoea or menses or skin affections.lt has globus hystericus i.e. patient feels as if a ball ascends from stomach to oesophagus. This is attended with excessive distension of abdomen and sensation as if the peristaltic motions were reversed with eructations smelling like garlic even regurgitation of food
2) Asafoetida affects left side generally : Left side of abdomen, left side of neck & nape, left arm & left leg. (Lach., Lil. Tig., Thuja).
3) All discharges are horribly offensive and ichorous.
4) Intolerance of all dressings ; sensitivness to contact is a leading characteristic inperiosteal inflammations, ulcers & caries of bones.
5) An empty gone feeling in the stomach at 11 A.M. (Sulph., Zinc) with a strange pulsation in the pit of the stomach,
6) Deficient milk with oversensitiveness after confinement (Lac Defl.)
7) Modalities. 

Aggravation—After eating, drinking, at night, rest, warm, left side.
Amelioration—By pressure, in open air.

chapter 35 ASARUM EUROPAEUM

European Snake Root HAHNEMANN Aristolochiaceae

INTRODUCTION

Asarum was little known except as an emetic, before Hahnemann’s time. His proving prought to light some unique characteristics out of which “Oversensitiveness of nerves” is the most notable one.

CLINICAL:

Alcoholism. Dysentery. Eye-affection of. Nausea. Spheres of Action & Pathogenesis — Asarum acts on nerves, mucous membrances and female organs. It produces a remarkable state of oversensitiveness of nerves.

CONSTITUTION :

“According to Guernsey, it is suited to chilly persons who are always shrinking from the cold, e.g. literary, sedentary men who are sick and chilly. Temperament—Nervous, anxious, excitable people. Miasm—Psoric miasm in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :
1.Oversensitiveness of nerves, scratching of linen or silk, crackling of paper is unbearable (Fer. Tar.)

2. Sensation of lightness of all the limbs ; patient imagines he is hovering in the air like a spirit (Lac. C.)

3. Sensation as though all the body, or a part of the body were being pressed together.

4; Cold “Shivers” from any emotion.

5. Constant Nausea aggravated after eating with clean tongue (Ipecac. Sulph.)

6. Longing for alcohol, even hereditary tendency to alcohol (Psor., Tub., Sulph-acid., Syph.)

7. Cold air or cold water very pleasant to the eyes : sun-shine, light and wind are intolerable.

8. Sensation as if ears were plugged up with some foreign substance.

9. Aggravation in clear fine weather and amelioration in damp wet weather (Caust., Hepar Sulph., Nux Vom),

10 Great faintness and constant yawning

11) Mind : Sensibility increased, even from mere imagination, Sensation of lightness of all the limbs ; patient imagines he is hovering in the air like a spirit. Sensation agthough all the body, or a part of the body were being pressed together. Sensation agif ears were plugged up with some foreign substance.Ailments from ; Bad effects of alcohol.

PARTICULARS :

Eyes:
Asthenopia. Darting pains in eyes after operations. Eyes feel stiff ; burn ; feel cold. Cold water or airvery pleasant to the eyes ; Sunshine, light and wind are intolerable.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : In cold and dry or clear, fine weather.
Amelioration : Washing face or bathing affected parts with cold water ; in damp, wet weather (Caust.)

Relations :
Similar : to Caust in modalities ; to Aloe, Arg. Nit, Merc, Podo, Puls, Sulph acid in stringy, shreddy
stools. Followed by : Bis., Caust., Puls., Sulph ac.


cheapter :36 ASTERIAS RUBENS
Starfish PETROZ Radiata

INTRODUCTION

This medicine is prepared from star fish belonging to the natural order of Radiata so it shows its pathogenetic relationship to Sepia & Murex which are prepared from cuttle fish and purple fish respectively.

CLINICAL :
Acne. Apoplexy. Cancer, Constipation,Convulsions. Epilepsy. Headache. Diarrhoea Uterus-affection of.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS:
It mainly acts on circulation, nerves, female sexual organs & rectum. This remedy produces disturbances of the circulation with pulsations and congestion in head, womb & chest., Acting on female sexual organs It produces great excitement.

CONSTITUTION :
Make up of the body : It is suited to flabby lymphatic constitution with red face.

Temperament : Iritable temperament.
Diathesis : Sycotic Diathesis.
Miasm : Sycotic & psoric miasms are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Easily excited by any emotion, especially by contradictions (Ana. Con.)
2) Sanguinous congestion of the brain.
3) Heat of the head, as if surrounded by hot air.
4) Apoplexy, face red, pulse hard, full, frequent.
5) Gait unsteady, muscles refuse to obey the will (Alum., Gels.)
6) Epilepsy, twitching over the whole body four or five days before the attack.
7) Constipation : Obstinate, ineffectual desire with hard round ball like stool.
8) Diarrhoea : Watery, brown, gushing out in a violent jet (Grot. T.,) Orat, Gam. Jatr., Thuja)



chapter : 37 AURUM METALLICUM

Gold (Au.) HAHNEMANN The Element

INTRODUCTION

The most precious thing which any creature likes and loves in the world, is its ‘own life’. Anything and everything could be sacrificed for its ultimate protection. But here is an element
which possesses the inherent power to destroy the very desire to survive. Gold is a very rare valuable metal, no doubt. Still it hasn’t got any direct utility as such in its natural form. It was
Hahnemann who found out the high therapeutic value of gold after it undergoes the process of potentisation.

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Asthma, Gonorrhoea, Genital organs, Glandular affection, Haemorrhoids, Heart affection, Locomotor ataxia, Mental affection, Paralysis, Syphilis, Throat affection, Urinary discorders, Uterine troubles, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Aurum met. affects mind, nerves, bones, cardiovascular system, genito-urinary organs and glands.

PATHOGENESIS

Its actions on the mind and brain mainfest a strong tendency to profound melancholy and inclination to constantly dwelling on suicide. It affects bones and glands tending to destruction of tissues, while its action on heart results in degeneration of the tissue and their reflex symptoms. It degenerates even blood and causes haemorrhage.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body. Aurm met. is suited to sanguine, ruddy people, with black hair and eyes, old people who are tired of life due to their missdeeds, having no desire to live and low spirited, lifeless pining boys. Constitution broken down by bad effects of mercury and syphilis.

Temperament; Melancholic and irritable temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.
Miasm: Syphilis is in the background.

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Suited to old people who are tired of life, in whom syphilis is implanted on a scrofulous constitution.
2. PROFOUND MELANCHOLY AND CONSTANTLY DWELLING ON SUICIDE.
3. Hurried and worried; uneasy and restless
4. Aggravation from sunet to sunrise (Merc. Syphi.).
5. Oversensitive to pain, smell, taste, hearing, touch etc.

 Mind : Aurum met. patient shows peculiar characteristic, rare and uncommon mental symptoms as follows: All mental affections are consequent upon and incidental to bad effects of mercury and syphilis.

He feels as if he has committed many unpardonable crimes and sins of enormous magnitude when young and on realisation of the paramount seriousness thereof, he becomes sad, repentant and despondent with despair of salvation and eager for redemption of sins. Therefore, he is sad and has complete disgust for life; very gloomy and taciturn. In order to get rid of these worries, he is constantly DWELLING UPON SUICIDE as the only way of solution. Consequently PROFOUND MELANCHOLY, prevails upon him throughout.

.He feels that life is a constant burden for him; feels hateful and quarrelsome and want to put a permanent end to it by COMMITTING SUICIDE.
.Aurum met. is the topmost medicine for depressive insanity.

.Self condemnation is inborn in a Aurum met. patient.

.He is very restless and anxious about the future. Has great desire for mental and physical activity, still connot do things fast enough.

.He is low-spirited, lifeless with weak memories. 

.He is very much hurried and worried; uneasy and restless; irritable and peevish; least contradiction excites anger in him.

.He feels that he is an unwanted element in society and has no right to live; even God cannot pardon his unlimited amount of sins and crimes, etc.

Ailments from : Bad effects of mercury, syphilis, alcohol, fear, fright, anger,contradiction, mortification, vexation, dread, reserved displeasure and disappointed love.

PARTICULARS :

Headache :

Causation: Headache from least mental exertion, fear, fright, anger or contradiction. Headache from

constipation.

Character of headache: Intense congestive headache with heat. Tearing pain through the brain to

forehead. Boring and tearing in skull bones.

Modalities: Headache is worse from every mental exertion and better in open air.

Concomitant: Falling of hair, especially in syphilitic and mercurial affections.

Eye:

Sees only the lower half (See only left half Lycopodiurm).

Heart :
Causation: Heart diseases are caused by syphilitic and mercurial affection with scrofulous base.

Sensation: As if the heart stood still; as though it ceased to beat; actually it stops for 2 or 3 seconds and then gives a sudden hard thump.
Character of heart disease: There is violent palpitation and anxiety with congestion of blood to head and chest after exertion. Pain in heart! region extends down the left arm to fingers. Pulse is small, feeble but rapid and irregular; visible beating of carotid and temporal arteries. There may also be fatty degeneration and hypertrophy of the heart (Phos., Kali carb.).

Bones :

Causation: Syphilitic and mercurial affections of bone. Caries of mastoid, palate and nasal bones with terrible pain. Otitis, otorrhoea, ozaena; excessive discharge with putrid and offensive smell.

Modality: Pain is worse at night, driving the patient to despair.

Testes :

Undescended and undeveloped testes; like mere pendent shreds; in pining boys, who are low spirited and lifeless with weak memory and who are lacking in “boyish-go”.

Uterine Symptoms :

Prolapse of uterus from over reaching or straining. The uterus is indurated and hypertrophied. Prolapse of uterus is not due to weakness of pelvic floor or uterine ligament, but because the uterus is heavy, hypertrophied and indurated. There are menstrual and uterine affections with great melancholy which are aggravated during menstrual period. There is foul breath in girls at puberty,

General Modalities :


Aggravation: From sunset to sunrise; in cold air; when getting cold; while lying down; mental exertion, many complaints come on only during winter.

Relations :

Aurum follows and is followed well be Syphilinum. Similar to Asaf., Calcarea, Platina, Sepia in bone and uterine disease.

Antidoted by: Coffee, Spigelia, Mercurius.

Antidotes to: Mercurius, Spigelia, Kali-iod.


AVENA SATIVA

Oat Gramineae

CLINICAL:

Alcoholism. Bad effects of morphine habit. Debility. Neurasthenia, Palpitation. Sexual excess. Sleeplessness.

It has selective action on brain & nervous system favourably influencing their nutritive function. Avena has been used empirically in substantial doses i.e. 5-15 drops of the tincture, preferably in hot water in cases of nervous exhaustion, sexual debility and the morphine habit. It acts as a best tonic for debility after exhausting diseases,. It is a good medicine for sleeplessness especially of alcoholics.There is inability to keep mind on any one subject, especially when due to mas-turbation or sexual irregularities. Author has found very usefulespecially in old age group whengiven with hot milk. In case of sleeplessness it can be compared with the following medicines :

. Coca : Can find no rest anywhere but sleepy.
.Coffea : Wakeful ; on a constant move sleeps till 3 a.m. after which only dozing sleepless, on account of mental activity, flow of ideas with nervous excitability.
.Kali phos : Sleeplessness with want of nerve power due to over work, excitement and worry.
.Passiflora : Sleeplessness in Asthmatics and hypertensive patients.
.Piscidia : Insomnia due to worry in neurotics.



chapter : 38 BAPTISIA TINCTORIA

Wild Indigo W.H. BURT Leguminosae

INTRODUCTION

Baptisia tinctoria is a Short acting and left-sided rernedy and can undoubtedly be claimed as a near about specific remedy for typhoid fever in anystage—says Dr. P.C. Paul of Calcutta. More than60% of early cases of typhoid point towards Baptisia. Dr. Burnett says of it, “The king of all remedies for typhoid. No remedy can supplant it inthe first stage”. Referring to this remedy Dr.Farrington says: “Typifies a fever which is decided typhoidly in tendency”. It can also be used as preventive against typhoid. In its lowpotency, it produces antibodies against typhoid bacilli. Dr. Bellsays, “Extended clinical observation has proved its value when dysentery assumes the typhoid type”.

CLINICAL

Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Dilirium, Enteric fever, Headache, Hectic fever, Throat affection, Tonsillitis, Ulcerated tongue, Urinary affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Baptisia acts on blood, mind, nerves, mucous membrane of digestive tract; left side of the body.

PATHOGENESIS

Baptisia disorganises and decomposes the blood and thereby tends to putrescence. specially in low fevers as in typhoid, paratyphoid and dysentery, etc. The principal use of Baptisia is exact typhoid state. In low potency it is capable of producing antibodies against the typhoid bacilli and thus it can undoubtedly be said to be a specific remedy fortyphoid fever. It can also be used as a preventive medicine against typhoid.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Face of Baptisia patient look as if flushed, dusky and dark red. He is stupid and has besotted expression and looks like a drunkard with prefect indifference. Ulcerated mouth with OFFENSIVE SMELL and OFFENSIVE breath.

Temperament: Lymphatic temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

.All the discharges of the body such as stool, urine, sweat and ulcers are VERY OFFENSIVE. Even breath is very offensive.

. In whatever position the patient lies, THE PARTS RESTED UPON FEEL SORE AND BRUISED.

. Patient is unable to sleep as he thinks that his head and body are scattered around the bed; 

.he is three persons and is unable to keep them covered. So he tosses about to get the pieces together.

. Patient falls asleep even before he can answer a question or in the midst of his answer.

. Perfect indifference and incapability of thinking anything; stupid, inability of fixing his mind on work, aversion to mental labour.

. He can swallow liquid only; least solid food gags; his throat is sore but painless.

. Look of the face is flushed, dusky and dark red with stupidness.

 Face and eyes are suffused so as to give it a besotted appearance and expression is like that of adrunkard.

. Ulceration in the mouth with offensive smell and dry tongue with a streak down the centre.

. A typical “TYPHOID STATE” is present in all diseases, such as typhoid, dysentery,diphtheria, etc.

Mind : Confused mind and perfect indifference. The patient is absolutely incapable of thinking anything with utter inability to fix his mind on any work. Does not want to do any mental work. .

The patient falls asleep either before completing the answer to a question, or sometimes when he is in the middle of an answer. The patient tosses about and says that he feels his head and/or body is scatterd around the bed; he is three pieces or persons and is unable to keep them covered; so he tries to get those pieces together.

PARTICULARS

Typhoid Fever :

Dr. Burnett says, “Baptisia is the king of all remedies for typhoid. No remedy can supplant it in the first stage.” It is claimed that Baptisia will, cut the disease short if given as soon as typhoid is suspected. It can be said to be almost the specific remedy for typhoid fever in any stage.

The symptoms which call for Baptisia in typhoid are as follows:-

(a) Temperature: Ranging from 103°F to 106°F. There is great nervousness, chilliness and aching pain especially in head, back and limbs. SORE AND BRUISED FEELING OF THE PARTS RESTED UPON, IN WHATEVER POSITION HE LIES, is well-marked.

(b) Pulse: There is marked bradycardia. Pulse is full and soft.

(c) Offensiueness: OF ALL DISCHARGES such as breath, stool, urine, sweat and ulcers, is very well-marked. It is very difficult for the doctor to examine the Baptisia patient as the OFFENSIVENESS IS UNBEARABLE.

(d) Tongue: At first the tongue is white coated with red papillae in the middle, yellow brown and dry and later it is dry, cracked and ulcerated.

(e) Delirium: Patient says that his body is scattered and he is two or three persons and cannot cover them up properly. So he is trying to get those pieces together. The sensorium is so blunted that the patient falls asleep even before he can answer a question or he sleeps in the
middle of an answer.

(f) Appearance of the Patient: The patient is very weak, prostrated, besotted and the face looks like that of a drunkard. His face is flushed, dusky and dark red. Incapacity of thinking anything. Unable to fix the mind on any work and is perfectly indifferent with aversion on mental exertion. Decubitus may also be noticed.

(g)Baptisia produces antibodies against typhoid bacillus and acts as a preventive medicine against typhoid fever if given early and in low potencies.

Diarrhoea :

The patient’s ileo-caecal region is very sensitive to touch and the bowels begin to rumble especially in this region. The discharge of stool follows which is very offensive with profound prostration and high
tise of temperature.

Urine :

Urine is very offensive with dark-red colour and scanty.

Dysentery :

Baptisia can be thought of in dysentery with TYPHOID STATE, where stool contains decomposed blood, which is very offensive, but often painless, with high rise of temperature. Dr. Farrington recommends Baptisia for dysentery “when the DISCHARGES ARE OFFENSIVE, contain blood and are attended by tenesmus, but with significant absence of pain, showing an alarming depression of vitality.” Dr. Bell says, “Extended clinical observation has proved its value when dysentery assumes the typhoid type”.

Throat:

Tonsils are swollen with very offensive discharge from the mouth. THROAT IS PAINLESS, but with offensive breath. Soft palate is dark, red and putrid smell, Patient can Swallow liquid only. Least solid food gags. Some differentiating points in favour of Baptisia as compared to Ignatia, to enable us to make a “snap shot” prescription are:

Ignatia and Baptisia throat :

‘In addition to aggravation when not swallowing, there is sometimes aggravation when swallowing liquids with Ignatia who gets relief from swallowing solids. This is somewhat like Lachesis, but is opposite to Baptisia which can swallow liquid only whereas the least solid food gags.

Relations :

Compare Amica, Arsenic, Gels., for malaise, nervousness, flushed face, drowsiness with muscular soreness. Hyos, Lachesis, Mur. acid, and Nitric acid in typhoid.
Follows well : arsenic.
Is followed well by: Nitric acid.

chapter :39  BARYTA CARBONICA

Barium Carbonate HAHNEMANN BaCo

INTRODUCTION

Baryta carb. is fully proved and constitutional remedy. It is deep-seated, long lasting medicine and it especially suits to those
who are at the extremes of life, i.e. infants and old people.

CLINICAL

Aneurysm, Apoplexy, Alimentary affection, Brain affection, Dwarfism, Foot-sweat, Glandular swelling, Haemorrhoids, Heart affection, High B.P., Memory defective, Quinsy, Tonsillitis, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on nutrition, glands, throat, prostrate, heart, blood vessels and nerves.

PATHOGENESIS 
It produces degenerative changes in infancy, acting upon the glandular system, causing inflammation and hypertrophy. In old age it is capable of acting on muscular coat of heart and blood vessels producing arteriosclerosis. Blood vessels get thickened and haemorrhage occurs. Due to this there is high rise of blood pressure especially in old men.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Baryta carb. patients are dwarfish in appearance; mentally deficient and physically weak and short. Children present a picture of typical cretinism, having short stature, swollen abdomen, puffy face, enlarged glands, thick lips and idiotic appearance. Old people, weak and fatty but childish in behaviour.

Temperament: Melancholic temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Tubercular and scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Dwarfishness, both mental and physical, runs through the whole of Baryta carb.

. Those who are liable to take cold easily, and every cold settles in the throat,resulting in sore throat, tonsillitis, quinsy and other   

  glandular affections need the help of this great remedy.

. Swelling and induration or incipient suppuration of glands such as cervical and inguinal.

. Diseases of old men, usually with enlarged prostate and indurated testes.

. Premature impotency. Childish old people with hypertension or childish old people with idiocy.

. Baldness in young people. Sclap is very sensitive to touch.

. Often young people who have masturbated or those who suffer from frequent seminal emission with chordee.

. Dwarifish hysterical women with scanty menses.

. Twitching of muscles during sleep. Talks in sleep.

. Mind : Idiotic and foolish, with loss of memory or deficient intelligence. Mental weakness. The patient is irritated and inattentive. There is lack of confidence in himself. Child cannot be taught for he cannot remember. Also the child cannot be taught how to walk; very inattentive. Child does not want to play, but sits in a corner doing nothing or throwing stones at strangers. Forgets in the middle of his speech. Most familiar word fails him. Dread of men, aversion to strangers and society. Imagines that he is being laughed at or criticised. Childish grief over trifles and childish old people. Does not want to look up or to be looked at. Fears that his own business will collapse. Fear about his future, about domestic affairs, etc. Constantly changes his mind. Becomes serious at laughable matters and laughs on serious occasions (Anac., Platina). Suddenly becomes angry, but soon feels sorry for it (Mezereum). Thinking of complaints makes them worse (Medo., Cale. phos., Gels.)
.
Ailments from : Emotion and suppressed foot sweat.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : The buccal cavity smells foul. Dryness of mouth early in the moming. Vesicles inside the cheek and the mouth. Saliva runs out of mouth in sleep. Intolerable stench from mouth unnoticed by the Patient himself.

Teeth : After eating, teeth feels too weak to chew any more. TOOTHACHE IN DECAYED teeth, before menses or from cold. TOOTHACHE WORSE when thinking about it, disappears when the MINDIS diverted.

Throat :
© Causation: Tonsillitis, caused by Supperssion of foot-sweat, cold drinks and cold air.

© Character of throat affection; Every cold settles in the throat. Tonsils inflamed with engorged

veins; enlarged glands of the neck. Smarting in the throat when swallowing. Throat is sore to touch.

Tonsils enlarged and prone to suppurate, especially on right side. Along with tonsillitis, palate and uvula are also swollen.

* Modalities: Aggravation on swallowing solids and when thinking about his troubles.

* Concomitans: Sensation of plug in throat. Tonsillitis leading to quinsy.


Stomach : Eructations as if fire were forcing its way through the stomach causing a feelling ofsorness. Sour eructations a few hours after dinner. Nausea, palpitation and anxiety in the morning, Pressing in stomach after eating. Sensation of soreness in the stomach, relieved by eructation.

Respiatory Symptoms

Nose : Coryza in children with large abdomen. Frequently nose bteeds. Sneezing causes concussive pain in the brain.

Cough : Chronic cough of scrofulous children with swollen glands and enlarged tonsils. Worse after slightest exertion. Cough comes in presence of strangers.

Modality: Aggravation in the evening, mid-night, lying on left side, active motion, ascending, stooping, in cold air, from thinking of it and by eating.

Concomitants: Sensation of sorness and plug in chest while coughing.

Cardio-Vascular System

‘Tachycardia; feels the heart beat. Palpitation and distress when lying on left side with restlessness and irvitability. Feeling of soreness in the region of heart. Pulse full and hard. Atheroma and aneurysm.

Modality: Aggravation when thinking about his troubles.

Baby : Baryta carb. baby looks dwarfish in size, with stunted growth; fatty with swollen abdomen and puffed face. The baby is very chilly and always feels cold to touch and also catches cold very readily.The baby is highly psoric with tubercular and scrofulous diathesis, (Medorrhinum baby has similar appearance, but is hot and has sycotic background. Similarly, syphilinum baby too is dwarfish, emaciated, mentally weak, but chilly and has syphilitic background.) The baby is very much deficient mentally, idiotic. Child cannot be taught anything or is unable to learn, because he cannot remember. Even the baby cannot learn the art of walking and consequently, there is late learning to walk (Calc. carb., Causicum, Silicea, Calc. phos.).

The baby does not want to play, sits in a corner of the room or street either doing nothing or doing foolish things such as throwing stones at strangers. The baby becomes serious at laughable matters and laughs at a serious matter. Saliva runs out from the mouth, both when awake and during sleep’ with intolerable stench coming from the mouth.

Such children usually has all the glands of the body enlarged, especially enlarged and inflamed tonsils, caused by Suppressed food sweat, Consequently, tonsillitis is a constant trouble, asscciated with chronic cold and cough. Every cold settles in throat. Tonsils have the tendency to suppurate and quinsy. Digestion of the baby is also weak and therefore, he often suffers from diarrhoea, constipation, vomiting etc.

General Modalities

Aggravation: When sitting, after menses, when thinking of aliments, lying on painful side and washing affected parts,

Amelioration: Walking in open air.

Relations

Antidoted by: Antim. tart., Belladonna, camphor., Mercurlus. Complementary to: Conium., Merc,

After or before: Sulphur, Tuberculinum.

After Baryta Carb.; Psorinum will eradicate tendency to quinsy.

Similar to: Alumina, Calc. iod., Dulcamara, Fluoric acid lodum, Silicea.

Incompatible: Calcarea carb.


chapter 41 BARYTA MURIATICA

Chloride of Barium HAHNEMANN

INTRODUCTION

The symptoms of Baryta Mur are like those of the other Barium Salts especially are very similar to Baryta Carb but it has a distinct character of its own. It is a deep acting constitutional antipsoric medicine.

CLINICAL
Aneurism. Asthma. Convulsions. Earache. Glan-dular affections. Idiocy. Mania. Nymphomania. Pancreatitis. Paralysis. Hypertension. Tinnitus. Tonsillitis. Narrowing of cardiac orifice. Sclerosis of brain and spinal cord.

SPHERE OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS
It has strong action on heart and arteries. It acts on glands especially parotid and pancreas. It also acts on lower alimentary canal especially rectum, on muscles and joints
giving stiffness and weakness as from overwalking. The white blood Corpuscles are increased.

CONSTITUTION

Make up of the body—It is suited to dwarfish children both mentally and physically and to the aged. Relation with heat & cold—Chilly patient. Temperameni—trritable temperament.

Miasm—Chiefly Antipsoric but other miasms Sycotic & Syphilitic are also in the background. Diathesis—Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS 
1) Disposition to enlargement of glands and recurrent tonsillitis from exposure to cold.

2) Convulsions with consciousness with electric shocks. (Nux Vom., Stram.)

3) Induration and narrowing of the cardiac orifice with pain immediately after eating.

4) Arteriosclerosis when there is high systolic pressure with comparatively low diastolic tension.

5) In every form of mania, when sexual desire is increased,

6) Loss of voluntary muscular power but sensibility intact.

7) Profuse flow of saliva and offensive odour from mouth,

Mind : Children who are slow to learn or understand, do not desire to play like other children. They are having foolish behaviour. Idiotic, imbecile, timid children. Fear of men, of evil. Insanity and any form of mania where the sexual excitement becomes strong.

Ailments from—Esposure to cold, suppression of foot sweat, suppresse gonorrhoea.

PARTICULARS

Ears : Whizzing and buzzing. Noises on chewing and swallowing or sneezing. Ea’rache ; better sipping cold water. Parotids swollen. Offensive discharge from ears. Inflates middle ear on blowing nose.

Throat: Difficult swallowing. Recurrent tonsillitis from exposure to cold. Tonsils enlarged. Paresis of pharynx and eustachian tubes, with sneezing and noises. Tubes feel too wide open.


 chapter : 41 BELLADONNA

Deadly Nightshade HAHNEMANN Solanaceoe

INTRODUCTION

Belladonna was known to the medical profession as early as 1500 A.D., but its full therapeutic value was not realised until it was potentised and 
proved by Hahnemann. The word “Belladonna” is a combination of two Latin words “Bella” and “Donna” which means “Beautiful Lady”. The Venetian 
ladies, of olden days used this plant as a cosmetic to brighten their eyes and flush the cheeks due to the property of its alkaloids, Atropin and 
Belladonnin. It was Hahnemann’s deep insight which could find out the immense curative value of these alkaloids and transformed them into a 
marvellous medicine through the process of potentisation. Belladonna is one of Hahnernann’s Polychrests which has its Paramount utility in ACUTE 
AND VIOLENT CONDITIONS. It is one of those medicines without which we might indeed to close our shops. Belladonna is one of CLARKE’S A.B.C. 
NURSERIES, others being Aconite and Chamomilla. WHILE BELLADONNA CAUSES TURMOIL IN BRAIN, ACONITE and CHAMOMILLA CAUSE TURMOIL IN CIRCULATION AND 
TEMPERAMENT RESPECTIVELY.

CLINICAL 

Abscess, Apoplexy, Boils, Brain affection, Carbuncle, Convulsion, Cough, Delirium, Dysentery, Epilepsy, Fever, Glandular affection, Headache, Heart trouble, Lung affection, Measles, Meningitis, Menstrual troubles, Mumps, Skin affection, Pleurisy, Disorders of Pregnancy, Rheumatism, Uterine affection, Vertigo, Whooping cough, Abdominal affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its chief centre of action is cerebrum from where it radiates its influence upon the entire organism. Brain and its membranes, cardio-vascular system, heart, lungs, mucous membrane of eyes, mouth, throat, skin, glandular structures are also not spared.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action on brain and its membranes and various organs produces a state of CONGESTION everywhere in the body leading to inflammation, delirium, illusion, delusion and hallucination and mania. General hyperaesthesia of both sensory and motor nerves, resulting in congestion of blood vessesls, heart and consequently reflex symptoms are produced.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Since Belladonna is more or less an acute remedy, there is no serious importance to be attached to its constitution. However, it is adapted to bilious, plethoric persons with red face and to a condition in them of local plethora, i.e.inflammatory state with throbbing pain and redness; and also to those having lymphatic constitution with fine complexion and delicate skin.

Temperament: Bilious, lymphatic and nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Tubercular diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Belladonna is predominantly a right sided remedy.

. Acute “SUDDEN and VIOLENT” onset is very characteristic of this drug. This aspect of the symptom is invariably present in every disease requiring Belladonna.

. “Congestion” is the key note of Belladonna. (Tension is the keynote of Aconite). Asa result of its action on the brain a state of active congestion is produced, resulting in furious excitement, irritability, convulsion, delirium and pain. Consequently,there is FLUSHED FACE, THROBBING CAROTIDS, HARD AND BOUNDING PULSE, rush of blood to head with wild delirium. Congestion causes redness of the
  face and eyes, rush of blood to head and face, throbbing of brain and carotids.


. “Redness” of Belladonna is very characteristic. Arising from congestion there is great redness of the inflamed part in particular and in    general, all over. The skin is very red and shiny. Smooth redness of the surface occurs over the whole body.

. “Heat” is yet another peculiarity. Due to the congestion there is great heat, especially at the congested and inflamed part. The heat is so       severe that the affected part imparts a burning sensation to the examining hand and the physicia is reflexly compelled to withdraw his hand.

. “Burning” sensation is another characteristic of Belladonna. There is intense burning anywhere and everywhere, both internal and external such    as in skin, brain, mouth, throat, tonsils, stomach, liver, etc.

. Sensitiveness to touch of affected part is very well marked in this great remedy. Cannot bear to be touched anywhere.

. Great dryness runs through the whole of this drug. This dryness is often associated with heat, redness, burning and throbbing. 

. Along with the above sings of inflammation, swelling or oedema are also found. The affected part is swollen, shiny, very red, h
  ot and sensitive to touch.


 Belladonna is a GREAT PAIN REMEDY, the characters of which are 

. pain comessuddenly, lasts indefinitely or goes away suddenly 

. pain is usually in short attacks 
. burning and throbbing character of the PAIN WITH REDNESS OF THE FACE AND EYES, fulness of the head and throbbing of carotids.
. pain runs from above e.g. head to downwards (Silicea and Gelsemium have pain running up the back).
. The patient is very much sleepy, but cannot sleep (Cham., Stram., Opium.).

. Belladonna patients are very much entertaining, jolly, well behaved and social when they are well, but becomes very violent and often delirious   when they fall sick.

. In Belladonna patients, sweat, if at all found, is only on the covered parts.
. Generally the patient is not thirsty, especially in fever.
. The complaints of Belladonna patient are aggravated by touch, jar and motion, draught of air and heat of sun; after 3 p.m., lying down and     uncovering and ameliorated by rest, standing or sitting erect and in a warm room.

 Mind : Belladonna is an excellent remedy for the delirious condition brought on by cerebral congestion. The cardinal mental symptoms are as 
 follows:

Great excitement and VIOLENCE run through the whole mental sphere of this wonderful remedy. The patient is very delirious with constant cerebral congestion.Belladonna is one of the trio of delirious remedies; others being Hyoscyamus andstramonium. There are many other remedies having delirium, but these three topthe list. The most characteristic feature of Belladonna delirium is compared to thoseother two of the trio is the decided evidence of an upsurge of blood to the brain.When the throbbing of carotids, the heat, redness and congestion of face aridconjunctiva pass away, the delirium also subsides in proportion. However,Belladonna may have delirium with pale face also, as it alternates but that is anexceptional case.The patient has furious rage and anger. He spits, bites and strikes those around him.He picks up the bed clothes, tears them to pieces and throws them off. He breaks into fits of laughter and gnashes his teeth, presenting a picture of absolute andviolent insanity.The patient imagines seeing various things, such as ghosts, monsters, hideous faces, various insects, black animals, dogs, wolves and dangerous wild animals.There is great fear of unusual and imaginary things; wants to run away from them; strange delusion, illusion and hallucination, with loss of consciousness.He uses absurd language; anxiety with desire to flee, escape and hide. In short, no remedy has more persistent and violent delirium than in Belladonna.Aliments from : Exposure to draught of cold air, cold wind, hair‘ cut, uncovering the head, head getting wet, sun, summer complaints, taking sausage and wine.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Exposure to cold or to heat of sun; from hair cut; congestion and suppression of catarrhal flow. 

Mode of Onset: Sudden and violent. 

Location: Right side, supra-ciliary region and forehead. 

Sensation: Sensation as if the brain were pushed through the forehead. Sensation of stabbing as by a knife from one temple to the other.
Character of pain: There is intense periodical nervous and CONGESTIVE HEADACHE, accompanied by tensive pressure on the vertex and on forehead. Rush of blood to the head with pulsation of cerebral arteries and THROBBING IN THE BRAIN. Jerking headache as if a weight were in the occiput; pain in the head and eye-balls, feels as ifthe eyes would be pushed out from the sockets.

Modalities :

* Aggravation: From slight motion, jar, noise, light, touch, lying down, least exertion or leaning forwards, bending downwards or lying down;   anything that takes the patient out of the prependicular

position.
* Ameliorafion: By tight bandage and during menses.
* Concomitants: RED FACE, THROBBING OF CAROTIDS; often with pain in the eye balls, boring head into the pillow. REDNESS OF EYES with burning and great intolerance of light. Double
vision, dim vision, objects’ appear upside down.
Vertigo :

Vertigo is caused by stooping or rising after stooping or change of position.Vertigo with falling to the left side or backwards; as if objects tun in a circle or sway to and fro. Sensitive to least contact. Scalp is very sensitive to touch with much throbbing and heat. Vanishing of sight and turning over in bed.

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : Mouth is very dry with or without thirst. Tongue and palate are dark red and dry: tremor and stammering speech. Submaxillary glands are swollen. Putrid taste in the mouth.

Throat : There is great dryness, of the throat and fauces, with REDNESS AND BURNING; Worse on the right side. Throat feels very much constricted with consequent difficulty in deglutition. Tonsillitis, worse on the right side, Uvula is red, swollen, very painful and burning. Constant urging and desire to swallow. Cervical glands are suddenly inflamed,

Stomach and Abdomen : There is great nausea and vomiting after eating and drinking. Vomitingof undigested food with much bile and/or blood; crampy and spasmodic pain in the stomach and epigastric region. Burning sensation in the stomach, pain in the stomach, which is aggravated by motion.Region of liver is very sensitive, painful and it is very worse when lying in the right side. COLIC FROM GALL STONE is also found.

Abdomen is very painful and distended and it is very sensitive to touch. Constriction, pain and heat around umbilicus. Violent cutting pain inabdomen. Tenderness of the abdomen; aggravated by least jarobliged to walk with great care for fear of jar. Transverse colon’ protrudes like a pad. Great pain in the ileo-caecal region. Cannot bear theslightest touch.
Stool : Due to paralysis of sphincter ani, there is involuntarty evacuation of stool. The stool is tardy, clay-coloured, thin, with thin slimy mucus and occasional blood. Contains small lumps like chalk; sour smell of the stool; with great tenesmus, spasmodic constriction of sphincter ani and backache as if it is breaking.

Urine : Urine may be suppressed or copious; frequent urging with small quantiy passing at a time. Urine may be bright yellow or clear and watery, but becomes turbid on standing. Retention of urine which passes only drop by drop. Involunatary mictruition with paralysis of the sphincter urethrae. Vesical region is very sensitive to pressure or jar and motion.

Cough :

Causation: Exposure to cold, hair cut, getting wet. sensation: Sensation as if larynx were inflamed, swollen and constricted.

Character of Cough: Tickling, short, dry, spasmodic, hollow and hoarse cough, awaking after mid-night. Attack of cough ends in sneezing. Cough  with tenacious expectoration. Pertussis, cough preceded by crying. Larynx is very painful; feels-as if a foreign body were in it. Voice is husky and hoarse. Dryness of larynx. There is pressive pain in the chest with shortness of breath.

Modalities:

¢ Aggravation: By least jar and motion, evening, draught of cold air, after mid-night, lying down.

© Amelioration: In warm room, rest, open air, wrapping up, by standing or sitting erect.

© Concomitants: Constriction across the chest as if pressed inward from both sides. Breathing laboured unequal, with stitches in the chest when coughing. During whooping cough, there is redness of face with dilated pupils.

Fever :

© Causation: Draught of air, cold wind, uncovering the head, from hair cut and summer sun.

© Mode of onset: SUDDEN and VIOLENT is the onset of Belladonna fever.

* Symptoms of fever: There is severe chill in the evening mostly on arms with heat of head. Along with natural chill, there is external burning heat. Chill and heat often alternate. Extremities are usually cold.

There is high fever, sudden rise of temperature with RED face and THROBBING OF CAROHDS;pulse strong and quick. Intense burning heat both internally and externally. Sweat is only on the covered parts and on head or there may be complete lack of any sweat. Sweat, if it occurs, appears anddisappears suddunly, Generally there is no thirst.Pulse is frequent and full or slow and fulh Chill notrelieved by heat of stove. Fever comes at 3 p.m. (Apis).

© Concomitants: Confusion of mind, anxiety and trembling with FURIOUS DELIRIUM (See Mind). In teething children, there is convulsion with fever; which comes suddenly with head hot and feet cold.

Meningitis :

© Causation: Draught of air, cold wind, uncovering the head, from hair cut and summer sun.

Mode of onset: Sudden and violent.

 Symptoms during meningitis: There is stupefying stunning headache from the neck to the head
with heat and pulsation. Head is inclined to bend backward, boring the head into the pillow. There iscongestion and burning sensation in the head and brain. Spasmodic distortion of face and lips, grinding
of teeth, with inclination to bite. There may also be irritability and acuteness of the sense of taste, smell,touch, sight and hearing.
Urine retained or there may be involunatary micturition.

Skin : Skin shows a uniform, smooth, shining scarlet redness. Skin is dry, hot and burning, imparts a burning sensation to examining hand. Painful sensitiveness of the skin to contact. There may be eruptions over the skin. The eruptions resemble measles or scarlatina. Erysipelatous inflammation is also found. .

Boils : In boils,. Belladonna must be thought of in first stage before the pus formation takes place. The indications are, “REDNESS, SWELLING and HEAT of the part, THROBBING pain SENSITIVE TO TOUCH, aggravation from touch and amelioration by application of heat.”

Prolapse : There is sensation of pressing downward as if contents of the abdomen would push out through the vulva. Worse in the morning and relieved by standing and sitting erect.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From touch, motion, noise, draught of air, looking at bright shining objects, after 3 p.m., night, after mid-night, while drinking, uncovering, the head, summer sun, lying down, least jar and motion and stror smell.

Ameliorarion: Rest, standing or sitting erect, in warm room.

Relation :

Complementary to: Calcarea. Belladonna is the acute of Calcarea, which is often required to complete a cure.

It follows well: Ars.alb., Cham., Hepar sulph. and Merc. sol. Is followed well by: Dulc., Hepar sulph. Hyos. Lach. and Rhus. tox.
Antidotes; Coffea and Hyos.


chapter 43:BELLIS PERENNIS

Daisy DR. BURNETT Compositae

CLINICAL

Acne, Boils. Indigestion. Masturbation. Overwork. Pregnancy-complaints of. Railway spine.Rheuma-tism. Stasis. Traumatism. Varicosis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Bellis Per is the first remedy in injuries to the deeper tissues, after major surgical work.

2) Stasis & fag’—is the keynote of the remedy. “Exudation, stasis, swellings of all kinds, varicose veins, engorgement of breast and uterus,    cerebral stasis etc. all come within the range of this remedy,

3) Traumatism—Of the pelvic organs with sore, bruised feeling in the pelvic region. Autotraumatism such as ill effects or fag from masturbation.    It is an excellent remedy for sprains and bruises. It is also indicated in condition like Railway spine i.e. Traumatic neurosis.

4) Complaints such as dyspepsia, amenorrhoea, skin affec-tions, rheumatism, effects ofcold or iced drinks, when heated.

DRUGS OF INJURY
1) Concealed injury—Arnica Mont.

2) Lacerated injury—Calendula.

3) Sprained injury—Rhus tox.

4) Bone injury—Symphytum.

5) Nerve injury—Hypericum.

6) Gland injury—Conium Mac.

7) Punctured injury—Ledum.

8) Capillary injury—Hamamelis.

9) Incised injury—Staphysagria.

10) Rubbing injury—Allium Cepa.

11) Burn injury—Cantharis.


chapter 43: BENZOIC ACID

DR. JEANES CM6 M, Co oM

INTRODUCTION

This remedy occupies a very important place, though of limited scope, in our homoeopathic materia madica. The main action of the remedy is upon urinary system. It is one of the members of Nash’s trio of offensive urine, others being Nit. Acid & Sepia.

CLINICAL

Asthma. Bladder affection of. Cough. Diarrhoea. Enuresis. Ganglion. Gonorrhoea. Gout. Rheumatism. Prostate enlargement.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

It acts especially upon the kidneys, urinary bladder, joints, and also on respiratory and digestive tracts. It produces and cures symptoms of a uric acid diathesis, with urine highly coloured and very offensive and gouty symptoms.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up—lIt is suited to gouty or the uraemic or the lithaemic constitution. Heat cold relation—Chilly patient. Miasm—All the three miasms are in the background.

Diathesis—Rheumatic, gouty diathesis & uric acid diath-esis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Urine dark brown and the urinous odour highly intensified.
2) Nocturnal enuresis in delicate children with strong characteristic odour of urine.
3) Rheumatic and gouty complaints with gonorrhoeal or syphilitic base.
4) Asthmatic cough with expectoration of green mucus and extreme weariness.
5) Diarrhoea of children—Stool white, very offensive, exhausting, liquid,-stools running “right through the diaper”.
6) Gouty concretions, affects all the joints especially the knee, cracking on motion.
7) Pains tearing, stitching in large joints of big toe, redness and swelling of joints, gout agg. at night.
8) Ganglion of wrist and bunion of great toe with urinary complaints.
9) Most of the symptoms appear on the left sides, but maysubsequently come on the right.

PARTICULARS

Urinary complaints It has got marked action on urinary system. It is to be thought of in nocturnal enuresis of delicate children, enlargement of prostate in old  men, catarrh of blad-der after suppressed gonorrhoea and evenin any morbid condition, when urine is strong smelling.Character of Urine—Urine is dark, brown and scanty with urinous odour highly intensified. There is excess of uric acid in urine.

Rheumatism & gout

Causation—Suppressed gonorrhoea & syphilis.

Location—All joints are affected ‘but especially knee symptoms may go from left to right.

Character of pain—Pains tearing, stitching in large joints especially of big toe. Pains suddenly change their locality. There is gouty concretions. Nodositis in joints, due to depos-ition of uric acid,cracking sound in joints. (Coc., Graph., Nit. acid)

Modality—Agg.—Open air, uncovering at night, motion. Ame.—By heat. Concomitant—Very strong smelling offensive urine and generally dark. Rheumatism alternatingbetween the extremeties & heart.

General Modalities

Aggravation—Motion, open air, uncovering at night, lying on right side.

Amelioration—By heat.

Relations

Similar to—Cop., Nitr., Fer., Thuja especially in enuresis after Nitr. has failed. Berb Vulg., Lith C. in arthritic complaints. Think of Benz Acid when Colch. fails in gout and after abuse of Cop. in

Suppression of gonorrhoea.

Incompatible—Wine which aggravates urinary, gouty and rheumatic affections.

In Enuresis Benz. ac. can be compared with the following drugs:

(1) In wormy children ; Cina
(2) After first sleep : Caust, Kreos,, Sep.
(3) After Catheterisatiori : Mag. Phos.
(4) In old people : Secale Cor.
(5) When the best selected remedy fails, with a history of sycosis : Medo.
(6) Obstinate cases with a family history of eczema : Psor.


chapter : 44 BERBERIS VULGARIS

Barberry Berberidaceae

INTRODUCTION

Berberis belongs to vegetable kingdom, the natural order of Berberidaceae, to which order also belongs Caulophllum and Podophyllum. It occupies a very important place, though of limitedscope, in our Homoeopathic Materia Medica. The main influence of the remedy is upon urinary system.

CLINICAL

Biliary colic, Bladder and urinary affection,Gall-Stone colic, Renal colic, Rheumatism, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts especially upon the kidney, urinary bladder, liver and gall bladder. It is a left sided drug.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action on urinary organs, results in irritation and subsequent inflammation and formation of renal stone; it produces gall-stone colic. It also has marked action on the liver promoting the flow of bile or when there is stasis of bile, producing gall-stone. Therefore, it is an excellent medicine for jaundice and gall-stone. peace

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Berberis vulgaris is especially suited to those people who are pale, having earthy complexion with sunken cheeks, having blue rings around eyes.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS 

1. Left side is principally affected, left kidney and left ureter, ' mess
2. Bruised pain with numbness, stiffness in kidney region and in small of back.
3. Soreness of the kidney, bubbling sensation, worse from jar and motion.
4, Backache, worse when sitting or lying, especially when lying on bed in morning.
5. Sensation of numbness, stiffness and lameness with painful pressure in lumbar andrenal region.
6. Wandering, radiating pains from one part to another, especially along the course of left kidney and ureter.
7, Stitching pain in the liver region and gall-bladder, shooting up to left shoulder; worse by pressure. 
8. Fistula in ano alternating with chest symptoms (Cale. phos., Silicea).
9. Gall-stone colic followed by jaundice.
10. All the symptoms are worse from motion, jar and touch.
11. Urine is greenish, bloody, turbid)and full of slimy mucus.


PARTICULARS

Gall-stone colic :
It has got marked action on the liver and produces various kinds of manifestations.

Character of pain: There is short, sudden, stabbing, puncturing type of pain in the liver region. The pain is shooting, tearing, burning, stitching and tingling, wandering from one side to another.

Modality: Pain is aggravated from little jar and motion.

Concomitants: Gall stone colic is often associated with jaundice. Stool white, bileless, clay coloured. 

Urinary Symptoms :

Urine : Constant urging to urinate; sensation as if some urine remained after urinating, with burning pain in the bladder. The bladder becomes very irritable and urine very slow to flow.

Character of urine: Greenish, bloody with mucus and jelly like sediment. It may be dark, turbid, with copious sedimentation. 

Renal-colic :

Causation: Due to stone in kidney.

Location: Left sided, starting from left kidney to ureter, then to urinary bladder and coming down to urethra.

Sensation:

(1) Numbness in the kidney region.
(2) Bubbling sensation in the kidney region.
(3) Stiffness in the kidnty region.
(4) Lameness and painful pressure in kidney region
(5) Burning and soreness in the kidney region.

Character of pain: Stitching cutting pains from left kidney following the course of ureter, bladder and then to urethra, Pain run up to the kidney, burning, stitching in several successive waves in the region of kidney.In acute condition, the pain is more severe. There may be haematurla with soreness in urethra.The character of urine may be bloody, greenish withthick slimy mucus and Jelly-like sediment.In thronic condition the urine may be dark, turbid with copious sedimentation. Urine is very slow to flow with constant urging.

Modality:

Aggravation: From jar and motion. Movement brings on or increases urinary complaints.

Rheumatism :

Location: shoulder, arms, fingers, toes, and feet.

Sensation: Sore and lame feeling in joint.

Character of pain: Burning, stitching, tearing type of pain, whi ates: appears in one part of the body, then to another part.
Modality: Aggravation from jar, motion and walking.

Concomitants: Rheumatic and gouty complaints-are associated with urinary troubles.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From motion, walking or carriage riding, and sudden jerking or movement.

Relations :
Similar to: Lyco., Sarsaparilla in renal colic.
Antidoted by: Bell.
Antidotes to: Aconite.
Follows well: Bry., Sulph., Kali bi., Rhus tox.
N.B. An occasional dose of Lyco., helps the action of Berberis.



chapter :45 BISMUTH

Hydrated Oxide HAHNEMANN Bi,O,0H, of Bismuth

INTRODUCTION
Just like many other metals, Bismuth too has been found to be an excellent remedy which exerts its general influence in the stomach
region. It has been observed by Hahnemann that the hydrated oxide of Bismuth could be easily potentised to develop its curative power

CLINICAL

Abdominal, operation and Vomiting, Cholera, Cough _ Delirium, Diarrhoea, Gangrene, Headache, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION 

Bismuth predominantly acts upon the gastrointestinal tract, mind and nervous system.

PATHOGENESIS

Bismuth exerts its influence on the stomach and stomach region. It causes a PURE gastralgia, but not associated with catarrh, like that of Nux vom. There is ejection of water immediately after it is taken, but food is retained a little longer.

CONSTITUTION

Bismuth is mostly an acute drug, as such consideration of constitution does not have much bearing on its selection.

Miasm: Psora and Syphilis are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

. Bismuth patient CANNOT BEAR SOLITUDE THE ALWAYS WANTS AND DESIRES COMPANY (Stram., Kali carb., Lil., Lyco.).
. He has MUCH ANGUISH and, therefore, moves about frequently—he sits, walks, lies, never long in one place.
. Vomifing of water as soon as it reaches the stomach but solid food is retained for days together.
. There is post-operative vomiting, especially of liquid, particulary after laparotomy, with GREAT ANGUISH OF MIND AND RESTLESSNESS.
. Pain in the stomach, relieved by bending backward and by eructation.
. Headache alternates with gastralgia, worse after eating and better by cold bathing and cold drinks.
. Motion relieves most symptoms except headache.

Mind : The most important mental symptom of bismuth which must be remembered is “SOLITUDE IS UNBEARABLE’. He wants and DESIRES
COMPANY ALWAYS. This is particularly noticed in children who hold mother’s hand for company (Stramonium) and would not let her go away.

Another characteristic mental symptoms is great ANGUISH AND RESTLESSNESS, He sits, walks and then lies, never remains for long in one place (Ars. alb.). Delirium tremens with loss of consciousness. Mental apathy with insensibility is found in Bismuth.

Ailments from : Syphilis, heat and summer complaints, abdominal operations.
PARTICULARS


Vomiting :

Vomiting of water in large quantity as soon as it reaches the stomach, but solid food is retained for a long time until large accumulation takes place in the stomach, which also is vomited out later on in decomposed form which is very offensive. There is convulsive gagging and inexpressible pain in the stomach due to accumulation of solid portion of food. Such pain may also appear after laparotomy.

Concomitants: Headache returns every winter, alternating or attended with gastralgia.

Stomach :

Due to accumulation of large amount of solid food particles and stool, there is great pressure as from a load in one spot. There is great pain which is crampy and spasmodic in nature, with irritation, cardialgia and pyrosis.

Stool :
Since food gets accumulated in the stomach .for several days, stool becomes very much profuse.
offensive and cadaverous smelling.

Cholera :
Bismuth is one of the best remedies for cholera infantum and cholera morbus, usually occurring is summer.

© Causation: Cholera is usually Caused in summer and in cholera epidemic time.
© Onset: The onset is sudden and its course is rapid.

© Character: There is profuse vomiting and purging. Water is vomited out the moment it reaches stomach but solid food is retained a bit longer. In Bismuth cholera, vomiting predominates over purging- Along with the predominant vomiting, there is purging and diarrhoea. Stool is watery, profuse, painless and very offensive.

© Concomitants; There is great prostration, with the face looking deathly pale and dark ring around the eyes, surface covered with sweat, but it is warm sweat. There is intense thirst for water. The patient is full of ANGUISH, RESTLESSNESS AND WANTS COMPANY ALWAYS. Bismuth patient may also suffer from toothache which is relieved by holding cold water in the mouth(Bryonia, Coffea, Pulsatilla, Natrum sulph.).

General Modalities :

Aggravation: by heat and summer weather.

Amelioration: By cold application, cold bathing and open air. Motion relieves most symptoms except headache.

Relations :

Antidoted by: Coffea, Nux vom., Calc. carb.

Similar to: Ars., Antim crud., Bell., Bry.


chapter :46 BLATTA ORIENTALIS

Indian Cockroach DR. DN. RAY of Calcutta Orthopetera

INTRODUCTION

It accidentaly relieved asthma in a patient who took tea in which these insects were boiled down. It is very useful in acute attacks of asthma
especially when given in low potencies.

CLINICAL

Bronchial asthma. Bronchitis.

SPHERE OF ACTION

It has special action on bronchiotracheal tree.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. It acts best on stout and corpulent patients.

. In acute case of asthma, especially when associated with bronchitis, threatened suffocation due to rattling of mucus, oppression of breathing,    restlessness, profus perspiration & aggravation from lying down are some of the indications.

. Useful incases of bronchitis and phtihsis where there is much dyspnoea.

. Indicated after Arsenic when it is insufficient : Especially useful in acute cases when Arsenic has given temporary relief. (Thuja Oc. is   chronic of Arsenic in Br. Asthma.)

.  It is also suited to cases which aggravate in rainy weather.

chpter: 46  Borax Veneta 

HAHNEMANN Na,B,07
Biborate of Soda

INTRODUCTION
Borax is one of the invaluable medicines, with very distinctive symptomps and selective tissue action. It is not easy to forget this wonderful drug, only when its peculiar characteristics are mastered. In old days Borax was used with bland vehicles for treatment of sore nipples and children’s sore mouth. But Homoeopathy offered it as a medicine of great value, telling when it may or may not be used, Kent also acknowledges the fact that Borax wasone of the main constituents amongst the domestic remedies used for all sorts of localconditions as a soothing substance and for healing purpose.

CLINICAL

Aphthae, Diarrhoea, Ear discharge, Eye affection, Headache, Menstrual disorders,Leucorrhoea, ete.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It mainly acts on gastro-intestinal system, especially mouth, stomach and rectum female genital organs, especially vagina and vulva. Skin and blood are not spared when the drug is used in physiological doses.

PATHOGENESIS

On the mouth and other mucus membranes, it produces a state of inflammation— ulceration with too much heat and copious secretions. From the uterus and vagina there is discharge of HOT ACRID LEUCORRHOEA. This heat _and acridity are the keynotes and characteristic pathological effects of the drug whenever it is needed.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Borax is especially suited to women and children with pale earthy face, red nose of young women, lax skin and muscles, tangled and frowsy hair.

Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

. Dread of downward motion in nearly all complaints, e.g. while going downstairs or rapidly down hill.
. Excessive nervousness, easily frightened by slightest noise.
. Aphthae: mouth of the child feels hot to mother’s nipple.
. Child screams before urination (Lyco.).
. Leucorrhoea copious, albuminous and UNNATURALLY HOT.
. Symptoms are aggravated in warm weather and after menstruation.

 Mind : Great anxiety. Patient is anxious about trifles. He starts at every noise, on hearing unexpected news, from excitement, this anxiety and nervousness are aggravated from DOWNWARD MOTION, even riding down hill or walking downstairs.
The patient is excessively nervous. Easily frightened by the slightest noise or an unusual sharp sound, and cough, sneeze, cry, lighting of a match, etc. It was hysterical manifestation also. Changes from one work to another. It has restlessness, nervousness, anxiety, and excitable state which run through the entire drug.


PARTICULARS

Head:
Plica polonica (matted hair because of filth and from a parasite). Hair becomes frowsy, tangled, splits,sticks together at the tips. If these bunches are cut off, they form again; very difficult to be combed.

Eyes :

Lashes turn inwards; eyelids are inflammed; eye lashes loaded with dry, gummy exudation, agglutinated in the morning, turn inward and inflame the eyes.

Mouth :

Aphthae in the mouth, on tongue and inside the cheeks, buccal mucus membrane much reddened, easily bleeding during eating or when touched prevents child from nursing, with hot mouth, cracked arid bleeding tongue with salivation. Aphthous sore mouth; worse from touch and taking salty or sour food.

Menses :

Useful in membranous dysmenorrhoea when there is violent, labour like pain before and during the flow, as if the uterus would expel itself through the vagina. Menstruation has the following characteristics :

Time: Too early.

Quantity: Too profuse.

Character of blood; Very MUCH HOT: the flow starts meagrely, but the same violent pain keeps on until the expulsion of the membrane. ‘
 Concomitants: Pain in the head and stomach with buzzing sound -in the ears.
Leucorrhoea :

Quantify: Profuse.

Character of leucorrhoea: Albuminous, starchy, very MUCH HOT as if warm water were flowing,very much ACRID leucorrhoea, preventing pregnancy, lasting two weeks. Leucorrhoea white as mucus or like the white of an egg.

Baby :

Oversensitive children. Face of infant pale and clay coloured. Children have small vesicles around the mouth and on the forehead.
This type of children often get summer complaints. There are small ulcers appearing around the anus. Stool frequent, soft light yellow and slimy.
These children have DREAD OF DOWNWARD MOTION. When laying the child on a couch, in cradle or a craib, the baby cries and clings to the nurse (Cham.). Child awakes suddenly, screaming and grasping sides of the cradle without any apparent cause. Child has frequent urination and screams before passing urine. Urine burns. So when it passes, the child cries, but he has desire to urinate.Urethra pain, as if, sore, after urinating. There is sore mouth in children. They cannot suck the breast.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From downward motion, from sudden slight noise, smoking, damp cold weather, before urination.

Amelioration: Pressure, holding painful sjde with hand.

Relations :
Antidoted by: Cham., Coffea
.
Incompatible: Acet. ac., Vinegar and wine.


 chapter 48 BOVISTA

Puff Ball HARTLAUB Fungi

INTRODUCTION
This drug with a limited sphere of curative action is obtained from a globular fungus. It is eaten in Italy before it is ripe, and when ripe, it becomes filled with a blackish dust that breaks its husk witha slight noise. Corresponding to this doctrine of signature, bloatedness, puffy condition of the bodysurface, signs of enlargement, flatulence, distention and noisy passage of flatus are the leading features of Bovista PATHOGENESIS is.

CLINICAL

Coceyx itching, Diarrhoea, Skin affection, Headache, Heart affection, Menstrual disordets, Leucorrhoea, Rheumatism, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

With a limited sphere of action on the female uro-genital systems, abdomen, blood and skin, the drug has earned unlimited name and fame.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces moist vesicular eruptions with formation of thick crusts. It relaxes the entire capillary system leading to haemorrhage from various outlets. Loose stool and vomiting are the effects when it produces inflammation of gastro-intestinal tract. On the skin it causes warts and corns.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Adapted to old maids who suffer from tettery type of eruptions.

Temperament: Nervous temperament.

Miasm: Sycosis is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Discharges from all mucous membrane are very tough, stringy and tenacious (Kali bi., Hydrastis),
2. Intolerance of tigh lothing around the waist (Lach.).
3. Usually deep impression on finger from using blunt instruments, scissors, knife, etc.
4. Sweat in axilla smells like onion.
5. Awkwardness: inclined to drop things from hand (Apis, mel., Natrum mur.).
6. Menstrual flow only at night (Mag. carb., Kreosote).
7. Diarrhoea before and during menses (Ammon carb, Ver. alb.).
8. Intolerable itching at tip of coccyx, must scratch till part becomes raw and sore.
9, In chronic urticaria when Rhus tox., seems indicated but fails to cure.

PARTICULARS

Menses :
In menorrhagia and metrorrhagia. Bovista is infallible.

Time: Too early or occasional show every few days between periods.

Character of blood: Dark and clotted.

Pain:

Painful bearing down sensation. There is occasional show of menstrual blood every few days between periods with intolerance of tight clothing around the waist.

Modality: Aggravation of flow only at night, not in the day time. (Mag. carb., Kreos., Ver. alb.— rev. of Cactus, Caust., Lil.).

Concomitant: Diarrhoea before and during menses.

Leucorrhoea :

It has pronounced leucorrhoea.

Time: Leucorrhoea ten days after menses (Borax, Conium)
.
Character: Very much acrid; thick, stringy, tenacious; the discharge may be like white of an egg or yellowish, green with soreness of vulva.

Skin :
Unhealthy skin. The eruptions may be either dry or moist, with thick crust formed by very thick, tough, stringy and tenacious discharges from the eruptions. Urticaria on excitement; Urticaria covers nearly the whole body from exertion. There is intense itching at the tip of coccyx, scratches until it bleeds, still there is no relief. Usually there is deep impression on fingers, from using blunt instruments, scissors, knife, etc.

Extremities :

There is great weakness of all joints, clumsiness, weariness of hand and feet, drops things from hand, objects fall from powerless hands. The patient drops cups and various other objects and breaks them constantly in spite of great carefulness and firm determination not to do so. This is due to weariness and weakness of joints.

Relations :
Bovista antidotes tar application; suffocation from gas. In chronic urticaria when Rhus tox. seems Indicated but fails to cure.
Antidoted by: Camphor.
Antidotes to: Effects of tar applied locally.
Followed well by: Gale., Rhus tox., Sepia.


chapter 49 Bromine

INTRODUCTION

It is a deep acting, constitutional, poly-chrestmedicine, It’s chief action is on the respiratory organsespecially larynx & trachea etc.

CLINICAL

Asthma, Cough, Diptheria, Glands—enlargement of. Goitre, Heart-diseases of, Mumps hypertrophy of, respiratory-ajfections of. Physometra, vertigo.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

Its principal action is in its tendency to cause induration & enlargement of glands of the body. Next to glands its chief action is on the
respiratory tract & heart. It also acts on female & male genitals. Tendency to infiltrate glands, become hard but seldom suppurate.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up of body—It acts best on persons with light blue eyes, flaxen hair - light eye brows, fair delicate skin. Suited to blonde, red cheeked, scrofulous persons. Heat cold relation—Chilly patient. Miasm—All the three miasms psora, sycosis & syphilis are in the background. Diathesis—Scrofulous.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

.Suited to persons with light blue eyes, flaxen hair, light eyebrow & fair delicate skin.

 Stony, hard, scrofulous, or tuburculous swelling of glands especially on lower jaw and throat.

. Membranous & diptheritic croup with much rattling of mucus during cough but no choking.

. Diptheria—Formation of membrane beginning in bron-chi, trachea, or larynx and extending upwards, Chest pains running upwards.

. Sailors suffer from asthma —'on shore”

. Fan like motion of alae nasi.

. Dyspnoea—cannot inspire deep enough as if breathing through a sponge or the air passages were full of smoke or vapour of sulphur. (Chlorum—  Inspiration through the nose while expiration was blown from the lips. Worse lying & better from motion and in the open air. lodum—Inspiration    difficult and is better for cold and worse for heat.)

. Cold sensation in larynx on inspiration.

. Hypertrophy of Heart from gymnastics in growing boys (from Calisthenics in young girls, Caust).

Physometra : Loud emission of flatus from the vagina ; membranous dysmenorrhoea. Mind—Delusion that strange persons are looking over patients’ shoulder and that she would see someone on turning. Quarrelsome. Sensation of cobweb on the face (Bar. Bor. Graph). Ailments from—Complaints from being, overheating (though patient is chilly).

PARTICULARS

Respiratory Symptoms

Coryza : Coryza with corrosive soreness of nose. There is pressure at the root of nose with stoppage of right nostril. Fan like motion of alae-nasi (Ant tart, Lyco, phos) Sneezing from inhaling dust. Hoarseness with dry cough & rawness in throat. Hoarseness coming on, from becoming overheated.

Diptheria : In diptheria the formation of diptheric membrane starts in bronchi, trachea or larynx and extending upwards. Chest pain runs upwards. There is membranous and dipth-eritic croup with much rattling during cough but no choking.

Cough : During whooping cough there is croupy symptoms with hoarseness. Patient gasps for breath. Cough, spasmodic with rattling of mucus. Every inspiration provokes cough. Cold sensation in larynx is characteristic.

Asthma : It is a very good medicine for sailors’ asthma. Sailors suffer from asthma “on shore” or when they come on land & better at sea.

Dyspnoea : With inability to inspire deep cough. There i is sensation as if breathing through a sponge or the air passages are full of smoke or vapour of sulphur.

Sexual Symptoms :

Male ; Swelling & induration of testicles with pains worse slight jar.

Female : Menses : Too early ; too profuse with membranous shreds. Low spirited before menses.

Breast: Tumour in breasts with stitching pains, worse left. Stitch-pains from breasts to axillae: Sharp shooting pain in left breast, worse pressure.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : From evening, until midnight. when sitting in warm room, warm, damp weather., leftside.
Amelioration : From any motion, exercise, at sea.

Relations : Compare : in croup & croupy affections, chlor. Hep., lod, Spong. Bromium had cured croup after failure of lod,, Phos., Spong., Hep.,
Hard goitre was cured after lod. failed.

N.B. : “The Chief distinction between Brom. and lod. is, the former cures the blue-eyed and the
latter the black-eyed patients”—Hering.


chpter 50 BRYONIA ALBA

White Bryony HAHNEMANN Cucurbitaceae

INTRODUCTION
Bryonia is one of the remedies inHomoeopathy, which is especially useful in acute
diseases. It was one of the Hahnemiann’searliest provings—one of those “without which”as Dudgeon says, “We might indeed shut up our shops”. Hence, Bryonia finds its pride of place inevery handbook of Homoeopathy and into every domestic medicine chest

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Asthma, Bilious attack, Brain affection, Constipation, Dropsy, Dyspepsia,Enteric fever, Headache, Heart affection. Measles, Meningitis, Rheumatism, Vicarious, Menstruation, Breast affection, Cough, Epistaxis, Gastric disorders, Pleurisy, Pneumonia, Respiratory affection, Thirst, Tongue, Toothache, Vertigo, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Serous membrane, mucous membrane, liver, fibrous tissue, respiratory system and brain are its main seats of acion. It is a right sided remedy.

PATHOGENESIS

It acts as an irritant and sets up a condition of sub-acute inflammation of synovial membranes, resulting in exudation and effusion in muscle fibres and joints, thus presenting a picture of typical rheumatic arthritic symptoms. Inflammation, dryness and lack of secretion, except in case of serous effusion, are the keynote actions of Bryonia. In all the mucous membranes of the body, there is great dryness and lack of secretion. It affects blood in its quantity, quality as well as circulation, increasing the flow and power of the heart’s action.


CONSTITUTION

Moke-up of the body: Tall, slender persons having dark hair, dark complexion, and firm muscular fibres.

Temperament: 

Irritable temperament. Relation with heat and cold: Patients are hot; aggravated by warmth in general.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Rheumatic and gouty diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. All complaints are worse from motion : This “worse from motion” in Bryonia is such a constant symptom with all sufferings and in all parts of the body, as to have become a GENERAL, ALONG WITH AMELIORATION BY ABSOLUTE REST AND PRESSURE.
. It is a very persistent remedy. All complaints develop slowly and have an insidious beginning (Gels).
. Bryonia causes dryness of all the mucus membranes e.g. lips, mouth, nose, respiratory tract, alimentary tract and thereby produces some of the most
 characteristic symptoms, e.g. DRY, HARD AND KNOTTY STOOL; DRY
 SPASMODIC COUGH, STITCHING PAIN, ETC.
, Great thirst for large quantity of cold water at long intervals; great appetite, eats voraciously.
. Stitching pain runs through the whole of Bryonia which is relieved by absolute rest and pressure and by lying on painful side.
. Bryonia is gourmand (Nux, an epicure).
. Dropsical effusion into the serous and synovial memberane, resulting in pleurisy, rheumatic arthritis etc.
. Desire: Desires for things, which when offered are immediately refused (China, Cham., Kreosote, Staph.); oysters, sweets, coffee, cold acid drinks and sour drink.
.Aversion: To milk, rich food, fatty and greasy food.
. Most complaints aggravate in summer and by heat; symptoms aggravate after a meal,
. There is intolerance of vegetable food.
. Vicarious menstruation; nose bleed when menses should appear (phos.); blood spitting or haemoptysis.
. Breasts are heavy, of a stony hardness, pale but hard, hot and painful; MUST SUPPORT THEM WITH HAND TO prevent least motion.

Mind : The patient is very morose and ill humoured; exceedingly irritable and inclined to be angry. There are great anxiety and mental depression. Delirium, talks
about daily business; worse at night; desires to escape from bed and wants to go home, although the patient is at home. Constant motion of the left arm and leg.
Desires for things which are refused when offered, Weakness of mind, as if he would faint.

Ailments from Anger, chagrin, mortification; complaints after taking cold or getting hot in summer; when the days are hot and nights are cold; cold food and
drink; from suppression of discharges and skin eruptions.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation: Due to draught of cold air; from constipation, from ironing.
Character of pain: Bursting type, as if brain is going to burst, with stitching and sticking pain. Feels that the contents of cranium would be pushed out.
Modalities: Aggravation FROM MOTION, in the morning, when first opening the eyes and relieved by PRESSURE and lying on painfuf side.
Concomitants: Dry white coating of tongue and thirst for large quantity of cold water at long intervals.
Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Mouth : As there is great dryness of the mucous membrane of the whole alimentary canal, the lips are dry, parched and cracked. Dryness of the mouth is well-marked, with great thirst for large
quantity of cold water at long intervals.
Stomach : There is pressrue in the stomach, as if a stone is lying at the pit of stomach. Dyspepsia with soreness in stomach is often met with. There is nausea and faintness when rising up. Vomiting of
bile immediately after eating, pain in the abdomen, aggravated after food, not relieved by pressure.
N.B. Most of the pains of Bryonia are relieved by pressure except gastric pain.

Constipation :
Causation: As Bryonia causes dryness of mucous membrane of colon, it produces a very bad type of constipaion.
Sensation.: No inclination or desire for stool.
Character of stool: Stool is DRY, HARD KNOTTY, AS IF BURNT.
Concomitants: Headache due to constipation, with dry tongye; and thirst for large quantity of cold water at long intervals.
Diarrhoea :
 Causation: After taking cold food and drinks (Puls., Arsenic, Argentum nit.), when the days are hot and nights are cold, during the spell of hot weather.
  Time: Morning diarrhoea, as soon as the patient gets up from the bed and puts the feet on the
  floor (Nat. sulph.),
  Character of stool: Dirty, watery stool, containing undigested food particles; very much acrid.
  Modalities:
  Aggravation: From SLIGHTEST MOTION.
  Amelioration; By COMPLETE REST.
 Concomitants: With dry tounge and great thrist for large quantity of cold water at long intervals

Respiratory symptoms :
Nose : Vicarious menstruation, nose bleeds at the time of menses. If the menstrual flow is checke!
suddenly from cold, nose-bleed will appear. Dryness of nose with frequent sneezing and loss of smell.
Cough :
Causation: After taking cold or getting hot in summer; from exposure to draught of cold wind.
Location: Right side of the chest is usually involved.
Character of cough: Cough is dry, hard with gagging and vomiting with stiching pain in the
chest. While coughing the patient holds the chest because slightest motion aggravates pain.
Modalities :
Aggravation: Cough is more towards night, from motion, when coughing, laughing, talking,from heat of room.
Amelioration: Relieved BY COMPLETE REST Jying on painful side and by pressure.
Concomitants: White coating of tounge with great thirst for large quantity of cold water at long intervals.

Pneumonia :
 Stage: In early stage of pneumonia Bryonia is usually indicated.
 Location: Lower lobe of right lung is affected (Kali carb., Lyco., Chelidonium).

 Sensation: There is stitching pain in the chest. While coughing, the patient holds the chest.There is frequent desire to take deep breath.

 Modalities:
 Aggravation: From SLIGHTEST MOTION entering a warm room, from deep inspiration.

Amelioration: By COMPLETE REST, lying on painful side and pressure.
Concomitants: Constipation, dry tongue, great thirst and mental irritability.

Breast :
Sensation: Mammae feels very heavy.
Character: STONY HARDNESS, very much hot and painful.
Modalities:
Aggravation: BY MOTION, patient must support the breast with hand while coughing or moving.
 Amelioration: By absolute rest and pressure.
Fever :
Bryonia is of great help in fevers of all kinds and even typhoid fever is controlled by this drug.
Onset of the fever is slow and insidious (Gels.—sudden onset, Aconite, Belladonna).
Causation: After taking cold in hot summer weather, from exposure to draught of cold wind, after
taking cold when getting warm.
Symptoms of fever: During fever, the patient lies very quietly on the bed; does not want to move;
even does not want to speak or open the eyes because a little bit of motion makes the patient worse.
During fever, there may be low muttering delirium. The patient talks about his daily business. Desires
to get out of bed and go home, although he is at home. The patient says during delirious stage
T want to go home.”
There is dry white coating on the tongue, with great thirst for large quantity of cold water at long
intervals.
Pulse is full, hard tense and quick.
During fever there is profuse perspiration.
Along with fever, the cough becomes dry and hard tuith siifching pain in the chest.
Patient holds the chest with hand while coughing; aggravated by MOTION and relieved by LYING on
PAINFUL SIDE AND PRESSURE.
There is dry, hard and knotty stool, as if burnt.
Modalities: Fever aggravates after slightest motion and is relieved by absolute rest.
In meningeal fever too, there is constant motion of left arm and leg with other generalities.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From slightest MOTION, exertion, touch, warmth, warm food and drink, warm room
and summer, suppressed discharges of any kind, at 9 p.m.
Amelioration: Complete rest, lying on painful side, pressure, cold, eating cold food and taking
cold drink.
Relations :
Complementary to: Alumina and Rhustox.
Alumina is the chronic of Bryonia.
Antidoted by: Acon., Alum., Camph., Chel., Ign., Nux., Puts., Rhus tox.
It antidotes; Alum., Merc., Rhus tox.
It follows well: Aconite, Nux vom. Op., Rhustox.
It is followed well by: Alum., Ars:, Kali carb,, Nux vom., Puls., Rhus tox. Sulphur.


 chapter 51:BUFO

The toad DR. CARL HENEKE Bufonidae

INTRODUCTION
This remedy is prepared from the poison expressed by cutaneous glands of the toad. The chief laurels of Bufo have been won in the treatment of epilepsy.

CLINICAL
Chorea. Epilepsy. Impotency. Lymphangitis. Panaritium. Breast-affection of. Skin-affection of.

SPHERE OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS
It acts on nervous system, skin, male and female genital system. It causes a desire for
intoxicating drink and produces impotency. Bufo causes low grades of inflammatory action, foetid
exhalations, and discharges.

CONSTITUTION
It is specially suited to feeble minded children who are prematurely senile. The patient has great sensitive-ness to cold. It is a deep acting antipsoric remedy.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Convulsive seizures or epileptic fits occur during sleep at night, (Cuprum Met, Lach.) also during coition and at the time of menses.
2) The epiletic aura start from the sexual organs or from solar plexus.
3) Desire for solitude in order to practice masturbation.
4) Panaritium where the pain runs in streaks/all the way up the arm. /
5) Lymphangitis of septic origin.
6) Mentals — In Bufo lack of development is found like Baryta Carb patients. They
always behave like children, feeble minded children, A state of confusion, loss of
memory & imbecility present in marked degree. The patient is sad, restless,
impatient and he is anxious about health. Desires for solitude in order to practice masturbation. There is also sensation of heart swimming in water.
 Ailments from — Self abuse, masturbation, injury.


PARTICULARS
It is a very important remedy in epilepsy, which is more or less connected with sexual derangement,
Epilepsy :

Causation — Masturbation habit or self abuse. Aura begins in sexual organs or from solar plexus.
The attacks usually occur during sleep at night, during coition, and at the time of menses. The patient
may or may not be awakened by the attack but when he does awake he will have violent headache.
Convulsion usually followed by profound sleep.

Modality — Aggravation — At night. During sleep. In warm room.

Skin : It is a valuable remedy when the whole, lymphatic course is affected after an injury. In
panaritium where the pain runs in streaks all the way up the arms. Every slight injury suppurates. There
may be itching and burning of skin.
There may also be loss of sensation in patches of skin. Blisters on palms & soles may appear.

Sexual Symptoms :

Male : Bad effects of onanism resulting in impotency, involuntary or too quick emissions. There is
disposition to hold organs. In these patients aura begins in sexual organs and they suffer from spasms
during coition.
Female :
Menses—Too early & copious clots and bloody discharge at other times. Epileptic attacks during
excitement and at time of menses.
Breast : Induration in breast. It is a great palliative medicine in cancer of mammae & especially
useful when the milk is mixed with blood.

General Modalities :
Aggravation—In warm room, on awakening, during sleep at night, during menses.
Amelioration—From bathing or cold air, from putting feet in hot water.

Relations :
Antidotes and antidoted by—Lach., Senega.
Complementary—Salamandra.


 chapter :52CACTUS GRANDIFLORUS
Night-Blooming Cereus RUBINI Cactaceae

INTRODUCTION
This important medicine was introduced to Homoeopathy by Dr. Rubini from Italy. The mother tincture is prepared from the young,tender branches and flowers. Dr. Hughes says
that it closely resembles Aconite in producing general rigor, followed by much heat and sweat,pain, haemorrhage and acute congestion in head and chest. But the differentiating point is that
while Aconite weakens the nervous system, Cactus never does so.

CLINICAL
Angina pectoris, Apoplexy, Asthma, Brain
affection, Fever, Haematuria, Heart affection,
Lung affection, Respiratory troubles,
Rheumatism, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts on heart, blood vessels, uterus and ovary in particular and the head and body in general.

PATHOGENESIS
It produces all types of overaction of the heart; from nervous palpitation to acute condition, hypertrophy due to valvular disease, angina pectoris and chronic palpitation, etc .

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Plethoric, full blooded persons.
Temperament: Sanguine temperament.
Heat and cold relation: Neither hot nor chilly.
Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Constriction, contraction and congestion of any organ in the body, especially heart, uterus, throat, chest, bladder, rectum etc CONSTRICTING PAIN runs through the whole PATHOGENESISis of Cactus.
2. The whole body feels, as if caged and each wire is being twisted tighter and tighter.
3. Oppression of chest, as from a great weight; as if an iron band prevented normal  breathing and motion.
4, Sensation of a cord tightly tied around the lower part of chest marking attachment of diaphragm with heart.
5. Heart feels, as if clasped and unclasped BY AN IRON HAND: as if bound and it has no room to beat.
6. Fluttering palpitation day and night, worse when walking and lying on left side and at approach of menses.
7. Pains everywhere, darting, and springing up like a chain of lightning and pressing with a sharp vice-like grip, only to be renewed again.
8. Haemorrhage from nose, lungs, stomach, rectum, bladder, etc.
9. Cactus has the weakness and coldness of the extremities, which characterise many heart diseases. 
10. There is vertigo on deep breathing.
11. Dreams of falling down during sleep.
12. Fear of death because he believes that the disease is incurable (Ars.).
13. Menstrual flow ceases when lying down (Bovista, Causticum, Lil. tig.—rev. of Mag.,carb., Ammon. carb., Kreosote).
14. Periodicity is well marked. Fever paroxysms return at 11 a.m. and 11 p.m.
15. Many symptoms are aggravated when lying down or come on when lying down.
16. Aliments from : Rheumatism, sun, damp weather and disappointment of love.

PARTICULARS

Cardio-vascular system or Heart :
Causation; Rheumatism,

Sensation: of constriction in the heart, as if an iron band prevented its normal movement. AS IF
CLASPED AND UNCLASPED WITH AN IRON BAND and there is no room to beat. Whole body feels,as if caged and each wire is twisted tighter and tighter.

Charecter of pain and symptoms: Pains are of pricking nature, impeding breathing and
movements of the body. Oppression of Chest; cannot lie on the left side. Dyspnoea from least exertion-

There may be dull heavy pain, aggravated by pressure and leading to suffocating respiration.
Pulse is quick, throbbing, tense and hard, Sometimes, intermittent and feeble.

Pains in the apex of heart; shooting down to left arm and to the end of fingers.
Pains go round to axilla, back and scapula of the left side.

Endocardial murmurs; excessive impulse and increased precordial dullness, enlargement of right E ventricle.

Palpitation with vertigo and loss of consciousness.
Palpitation is preceded by rumbling in stomach. Palpitation of long standing, caused by unfortunate love.

Modalities:
* Aggravation: By walking, at night, by lying on left side and after eating.
© Amelioration: After sleep, rest, fresh air and open air.
© Concornitants: Blueness of face, hot head and hands and icy cold feet.

Fever :
Rheumatic fevers and intermittent fevers are often treated with this remedy.
Causation: Sun and damp weather.
Time: Fever paroxysms come, at 11 a.m. and 11 p.m. Slight chilliness towards 10 a.m.

Character: Chilliness with chattering of teeth. Chilliness not relieved by covering. There is burning
heat with shortness of breath Scorching heat at night with hot face. Heat terminates with perspiration,
coldness of back and icy coldness of hands and feet.
Intermittent fever of quotidian type, occurring every day at the same hour.

Concomitants: There is great dyspnoea, violent pain in the head, coma, stupefaction, insensibility till midnight, followed by unquenchable thirst and perspiration.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: At 11 a.m. and 11 p.m. and lying on left side.
Amelioration: By sleep, rest, fresh and open.air.
Relation :
Cactus is antidoted by Aconite and Camphor.
Follows Well: Aconite, Ars., Bry., Cham., Lach., Nux., Rhus., Belladonna, Gels, and Amica.

CALADIUM
American Arun E.W. BERRIDGE Araceae

CLINICAL
Asthma, Fever, Impotency, Nymphomania.Pruritus vaginae. Spermatorrhoea.
GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Pruritius vaginae inducing onanism;(Org., Zinc.) Specially during pregnanc  with mucous discharge.
. Impotency : Penis is relaxed with sexual desire, excitement and mental depression.
  There is no erection even after caress, no emisson, no orgasm during an embrace (Cal., Sel.)
. Falls asleep during evening fever and wakes when stops.
. Sweet sweat attracts the files.
. Frequent eructations of very little wind, stomach feels full of dry food.
. Very sensitive to noise; slightest noise startles from sleep (Asar., Nux., Taren.)
. Mosquito and insect bites burn and itch intensely.
. Destroys craving for tobacco.
. Itching rash alternates with asthma.

 Modalities :
Aggravation — Motion, from warmth.
Amelioration — From sweat (Rev. of Merc) after short sleep (opp.Lach.), cold water (itching).

chapter;53 CALCARCA SULPHURIUM
Calcium Sulphate C. HERING CaSO,

INTRODUCTION 
This is one of the twelve tissue remedies by Schussler. In the last edition of his bio-chemic
therapy, Schussler discarded Calc Sulph. because it is not an actual constituent of the
tissues & he distributed its functions between Silicea & Natrum. Phos. Homoeopaths, having
no bio-chemic theory to support, continue its use specially as it was proved by Dr. Bering & Others.

CLINICAL
Abscess Carbuncles. Eczema. Fistula, Haemorrhages. Tonsillitis, Ulcers.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Liver, mucous membranes, skin, connective tissue and glands.

PATHOGENESIS
This drug has got a special affinity for suppuration. Calc. Sulph. resembles Hepar Sulph, but acts deeper and more intensely and is often useful after Hepar has ceased to
act. It is also useful when Kali Mur ceased to act. Calc Sulph. shares importance with Sulph. Tuber & Psorinum. The tendency to formation of abscesses.in the body in any
place is a strong feature of this remedy, and is quiet similar to Pyrogen.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Tendency to formation of abscesses in the body in any place.
2) Mucous discharges are yellow, thick and lumpy. 3] Burning & itching of
soles of feet.
4) Desire fruit, green sour vegetables, tea.
5) Inflammations of the eyes with discharge of thick yellow matter.
6) Yellowish discharge from posterior nose.
7) Tongue is flabby with yellow coating at the base of the’ tongue.
8) Pimples and pustules on the face.
9) The presence of pus with a vent.
10) Unhealthy skin : Ulcers do not heal rapidly.
11) Painful abscesses about the anus in cases of fistula.
12) Mind: Changeable mood. Sudden loss of memory. Absent-minded and irritable,Anxious, better in open air. Discontended, full of tears.

PARTICULAR
Head : Headache with nausea & with feeling as if eyes were sunken. Headache comes on from becoming cold, but made better by cool air.
Vertigo, with deadly nausea, on moving head quickly.

Gastrointestinal Symptoms :
Mouth : Inside of lips sore. Dry hot mouth, Gum boils.
Tongue : Tongue flabby, resembling a layer of dried clay. Sour Soapy acrid taste. Yellow coating at base.
Throat : Suppurating sorethroat. Last stage of ulcerated sore throat with discharge of yellow matter. Suppurating stage of tonsillitis when abscess is discharging.
Stomach : There is burning pain in stomach. Nausea with vertigo. Desire for fruit, cold drinks, acids, salt and sweet. Great thirst and appetite.
Abdomen : There is pain in the region of liver and in right side of Pelvis followed by weakness, nausea and pain in stomach.
Stool : Purulent diarrhoea mixed with blood, Pus like slimy discharge from the bowels. Diarrhoea after maple sugar and change of weather.

Respiratory Symptoms:

Cough : Cough associated with hectic fever and purulent and sanious expectoration, there is pain across chest. Burning & weakness in chest.
       Catarrh with thick lumpy, white yellow or pus like secretions is guiding symptom in respiratory complaints.
Skin : There are numerous skin symptoms in Calc Sulph. Unhealthy skin, cuts, wounds, bruises ete. do not heal quickly. Skin affections with yellowish scabs & purulent exudations., Burning and itching of
skin. Dryness of skin. Itching in bed and better by scratching. Ulcers bleed, burn & are scaly, crusty and deep. Ulcers discharge bloody pus, offensive, thick yellow.
Many little matterless pimples under the hair bleeding when scratched.

chapter 54 CALCAREA ARSENICA
Arsenite of lime HERING Ca;(ASO),
INTRODUCTION
Calcarea ars. is prepared by mixing Calcarea and Arsenic. So in Calcarea ars. we get few symptoms of
Calcarea carb. and few symptoms of Arsenicum album, e.g. the person is chilly, fatty, ailments occur during
climacteric period, mental depression, weak heart Palpitation on ascending, etc., are the symptoms of
Calcarea; whereas mental anxiety, chill, great weakness, etc. are the symptoms of Arsenic. Dr. Hering
proved this drug on his own body.

CLINICAL
Asthma, Cholera, Constipation, Fever, Heart affection, Headache, Kidney and Liver affections, Nephritis, ete.
SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts on mind, heart, liver, spleen and kidney.

PATHOGENESIS
Calcarea arsenica, acting on heart, causes palpitation; on kidney it produces inflammation, resulting in acute and chronic nephritis.

CONSTITUTION
Make-up of the body: The patient is fair, fatty and flabby and looks like a calcarea Patient.
Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient,

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Slightest emotion causes palpitation of heart (Lith.c.)
2. Rush of blood to the head and chest (Glonoine).
3. Kidney region is very sensitive to pressure.
4. Enlarged spleen and liver of the children.
5. Epilepsy from valvular diseases of the heart.

Mind : Anger, anxiety, great mental depression, desires company, confusion,delusion and illusion.

Ailments from : Drinking alcohol, after abstaining from drinking, fleshy women approaching menopause and EMOTIONS.

PARTICULARS
Headache :
Weekly headache, violent rush of blood to head with vertigo. Pain in head, better by lying on painful side.
Heart :
Calcarea ars. is a great heart remedy.
The slightest emotion causes palpitation of the heart.
Constriction and pain in region of heart, suffocative feeling. Oppression arid throbbing with pain in back extending to arms.
Rush of blood to head and left chest.
Epilepsy with valvular diseases of the heart. Aura felt in the region of heart.
Heart beat is missing at every fourth beat.
All these heart complaints are mostly found in fleshy and chilly women, approaching menopause.
Palpitation worse on exertion, emotion and on ascending.
Great craving for alcohol is present.
Kidney :
Nephritis; Kidney region is very sensitive to pressure. Albuminuria, urine passes every hour.
General Modality :
Aggravation: From slightest exertion and EMOTION.
Relations :
Antidoted by: Carbo veg., Glon. and puls.
Compatible: Con,, Glon., Ruls., and Op.


 chapter;55  CALCAREA CARBONICA
Middle layer of HAHNEMANN Calcium.Oyster Shell Carbonate (Ca Cos)

INTRODUCTION
This great Hahnemannian antipsoric is a wonderful constitutional remedy par
excellence. Dr. Mrs. Tyler remarks about
Calcarea that—
“With the chalky complexion goesFatness without fitness, Sweating without heat.
Bones without strength,
Tissues of plus quantity and minus quality,
Mere flabby, bulky with weakness and Weariness.”
“Some remedies are difficult to spot; the difficulty is to MISS Calcarea, when typical”
says Tyler. It is one of the greatest monuments of Hahnemann’s genius and is a great
polychrest remedy, and ranks with sulphur and Lycopodium at the head of anti-psorics.

CLINICAL
Abdominal disorders, Acidity, Anaemia, Bone affection, Breast affection, Cough, Dentition, Diabetes, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Dyspepsia, Eye troubles, Epilepsy, Fever,
Glandular affection, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Lung affection, Menstrual disorders, Miscarriage, Pregnancy disorders, Respiratory troubles, Rheumatism, Ricket, Skin
affection, Uterine affection, Vertigo, Worm troubles, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
The main seats of action of Calcarea carb. are bones, glands, blood, skin, mind and female genital organs.

PATHOGENESIS
Calcarea carb. produces impairment in nutrition of various organs, particularly BONES; alteration in composition of blood, with chief action on skin and bones,
manifesting increased local or general perspiration, swelling of glands, softening and bending bones, abscesses in deep muscles, polypi and exostoses.

CONSTITUTION
Calcarea carb. is adapted to “LEUCOPHLEGMATIC” constitution.
Make-up of the body: It is suited to FAIR, FATTY AND FLABBY patient who becomes easily fatigued and tired on walking, with much sweating, cold extremities and
sour smell of the body. There is TENDENCY TO OBESITY in youth. Slow in movement,
Make-up of the body of baby: Children who crow rar. chalky look with red face, large belly like an inverted saucer with LARGE HEAD opEN FONTANELLES AND SUTURES,
flabby muscles, pale skin, soft bonesi who SWEAT EASILY, SPECIALLY ON BACK SIDE OF THE HEAD AND NECK and swollen glands.
Girls who are fleshy, plethoric and grow too rapidly.
Relation with heat and cold: CHILLY PATIENT, DISPOSED to CATCH COLD VERY EASILY.
Miasm: It is one of the greatest anti-psoric and antisycotie remedies.
Diathesis: Scrofulous, rachitic and tubercular diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

.The patient has GREAT SENSITIVNESS TO TAKE COLD; gets frequent coryza which is chronic in nature and psoric in origin, CANNOT TOLERATE COLD (in acute stage, Belladonna).
.Disposed to grow fat, corpulent and uniwieldy.
.Sweat: Sweat of Calcarea carb. is very characteristic. HEAD SWEATS PROFUSELY, WHILE SLEEPING WETTING the pillow far around. Profuse perspiration mostly on back of head and neck or chest and upper part of the body.
.Sweat of single part, head, scalp, nape of neck, chest, axillae, sexual organs, hands, palm, knees, feet, sole, etc. with coldness. The sweat is Sour Smelling. Rawness of
.soles of feet from perspiration; blisters and offensive foot sweat.
.Coldness in general and the single part (Kali bi); head, stomach, abdomen, feet and legs habitually cold and damp, as if they had cold damp stockings on; continuously
.cold in bed; averison to cold open air. “It goes right through her”; Sensitive to cold damp air; the patient has great liability to take cold.
.Feels better in every way when constipated, stool has to be removed mechanically.
(Aloe., Sepia, Silicea, Thuja.).
.Calearea is an excellent remedy for polypi and exostosis.
. The patient desires and likes to be magnetised. (Phos., Silicea),
. All discharges smell sour e.g. vomitus, diarrhoea, sweat, eructation; sour odour of the whole body (Mag. Carb., Hepar., Rheum).
.Longing for eggs, especially during either sickness or convalescence; craves undigestible things (Alumina, Nitric acid, Cina, Cicuta, Psorinum); has aversion to
meat (Graphitis, Alumina, Pulsatilla, Muriatic acid); great longing for fresh air (when in a room) which inspires, benefits and strengthens (Puls., Sulphur).
. Mind : Calcarea carb. manifests very characteristic mental symptoms which can be

summarised as follows:- .
There is great apprehension, which becomes worse towards evening. Fear of darkness,loss of reason, misfortune, contagious and chronic disease. Fears that she will lose her
reason or that people will observe her mental confusion. Very forgetful, confused andlow spirited. Dejected and melancholic. Great anguish with palpitation. Restlessness
of mind with gloomy mood and anxiety. Peevish, always obstinate and self-willed.Indisposed to all work. Aversion and repugnance to work with great irritability.
Slight mental effort produces heat. The least mental excitement causes profuse returnof menstrual flow. The patient is timid and restless, as if an evil was impending over
her. Solitude is a burden to her with, coldness of face, of hands and feet. Great desire to be magnetised (Phosphorus, Silicea).

Aliments from : Defective assimilation, imperfect ossification, suppressed sweat,alcohol, cold moist wind, self abuse, over-lifting, strains, mental strains, loss of vital
fluids, suppressed eruption, suppressed menses, suppressed foot sweat, fright, etc.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal tract :
Mouth : There is Sour taste in mouth with great thirst in the aftermoon. Toothache only while eating. The toothache is aggravated by both heat and cold and in the evening. Putrid and offensive smell
from the mouth.

Stomach 
The pit of stomach is swollen like an inverted saucer and is very painful to pressure. There is great craving for undigestible things such as chalk, coal, pencil, salt, etc. (Alumina, Cina, Cicuta,
Nitric acid, Psorinum). The patient has great longing for eggs, especially either during sicknmess or convalescence, but has aversion to meat, fat and milk which disagree. Acidity of the digestive tract is
very prominent. There is frequent sour eructation, sour vomiting and stool. When the patient is tired and overworked, there is complete loss of appetite, with pain in the epigastrium, which is very painful and
tender to touch. Aggravation by eating and by pressure.

Abdomen : The abdomen is pot-bellied and is very sensitive to slightest pressure. Liver region is very painful, aggravated by stooping. Inguinal and mesenteric glands are swollen and painful. Increased
deposition of fat in abdomen, with consequent distension and hardness.

Stool : Calcarea carb. patient is habitually constipated and the patient feels better in every way when constipated. However, there may also be occasional diarrhoea especially in children during
dentition period. The character of stool is white and sour smelling.

Respiratory organs :
Nose : Nasal symptoms are caused by exposure to cold.
Character: There is frequent sneezng without cold, Dry coryza with much sneezing.
Modality: aggravated by exposure to cold.
Concomitant: The above symptoms may be associated with or followed by violent headache.
Throat :
 Causation: Exposure fo cold.
Character: Painless hoarseness aggravated in the morning, (aggravation in the evening — Carbo veg., Phos., Hepar sulph., but with splinter-like sensation; Causticum, but with soreness
or rawness). There is stitching pain in the throat during deglutition. Uvula is dark red and full of vesicles. .
Cough :
Causation: Cough is brought on by exposure to cold, standing on damp pavements, or working while standing in cold water; modellers or workers in cold clay.
Sensation: Sensation in the throat, as if dust is in the throat; as if there was a plug going up and down.
Character of cough: Cough dry and tickling. Cough in single paroxysm (2 paroxysms—Merc, sol., Puls; 3 paroxysms—Cuprum met., Stannum). Sputa is yellow in colour; expectoration tastes sweet,
The pieces of sputa are ejected as pieces of pus. Sometimes sputa is stained with blood.
Modality: aggravation in the evening and night, by eating and playing piano.
Concomitants: With cough, there may be stitching pain in the chest.
Bronchial Asthma : There is severe anxious asthma with dyspnoea and stitches in the chest, also with tension in the lower part of the chest. There is hot breath, heat in the mouth, but no thirst.

 Modality: Aggravation in the morning, forenoon and by sitting.
Tuberculosis : It is an excellent remedy for pretubercular condition. For tubercular affections of
lungs to tall, slender, rapidly growing young people, Calcarea carb. is an infallible remedy. Usually the
upper third of the right lung is affected (Ars., Upper left, Sulphur)

Menses : Calcarea carb. is a remedy par excellence for menstrual troubles, the indications for
which are as follows:-
It is suited to ladies whose first menstruation (menarche) commenced at an early age.
© Time: Too early.
© Quantity: Too Profuse (Sometimes may also be scanty or suppressed).
¢ Duration: Too long lasting with subsequent amenorrhoea.
© Character of blood: Bright red blood.
¢ Modality: Least mental excitement causes profuse return of menstrual flow.
+ Concomitants:

(a) Before menses: feet habitually cold and damp, as if they had cold damp stockings on:continuously cold in bed. Voluptuous dreams before menses. Headache may also appear just the previous day with chill in the evening and then colic continuing throughout the night.
(b) During menses: The. patient may have vertigo with rush of blood to the head and heat on vertex. Nausea with occassional vomiting and tenesmus may be there.
(c) After menses; Here may be pinching type of colic when the mense ceases.

Leucorrhoea : Ladies requiring Calcarea carb., may also suffer from leucorrhoea which is milky white but acrid. Leucorrhoea in young children too can be successfully treated with this great remedy
(Caulophyllum).
Uraemia or other diseases brought on by standing on cold, damp pavements or working whilé standing in cold water in modellers, or workers in cold clay, call for this remedy with marvellous results
Bone Symptoms : The bone symptoms of Calcarea carb. are very striking and jrominent. These symptoms are marked mostly in RICKETY CHILDREN.
Bones are soft and weak and they DEVELOP VERY SLOWLY. The bones are unable to hold the weight of the bulky, flabby body and, therefore, OFTEN CURVATURES OF BONES, especially of spine
and long bones occur. The extremities are crooked, deformed and bones are irregularly developed. Pathological fracture of the bones, especially of long bones is a frequent phenomenon. Since the
bones are weak, there is late learning to walk. The HEAD IS LARGE AND THE FONTANELLES AND SUTURES REMAIN OPEN WITH DELAYED OSSIFICATION. Teeth do not appear in time and
consequently there is difficult and DELAYED DENTITION IN CHILDREN. Calcium and phosphorus are deficient in bones.

Bechr claims that Calcarea is superior to any other medicine in caries of vertebrae.

Calcarea carb.—Old man : Old man with fatty degeneration of heart (Phos,. Aurum met., Kali carb.). They suffer from palpitation and dyspnoea on little exertion. Pyaemic state with cold abscesses in
deep muscles (Merc., sol.)
Calcarea carb—Young man : He GROWS VERY RAPIDLY with tubercular infiltration especially of the upper lobe of the right lung along with other characterstic symptoms of the drug.
Calcarea carb.—Young girl : She too GROWS RAPIDLY and suffers from anaemia and chlorosis and other characteristic menstrual symptoms, with. typical constitution and sweat with coldness.
Calcarea carb.—Baby : The child is FAIR, FATTY and FLABBY. Face is red and muscles are flabby.
The head is large and the abdomen is swollen and looks like an inverted saucer.
The bones are weak and soft. They develop very slowly. The weak bone is unable to sustain and hold the weight of the body and, therefore, there is LATE LEARNING TO WALK. THE FONTANELLES AND
SUTURES REMAIN OPEN FOR A LONG TIME. There is delayed ossification. There are curvatures of the bones, especially of spine and long bones. The extremities are crooked and deformed, bones develop
irregularly. There te DIFFICULT AND DELAYED DENTITION. Teeth do not appear in time.
Usually Calc. carb. child is constipated but there maybe sour and offensive diarrhoea during dentition with sour vomiting. The whole body smells sour. So also all excretions. The mile-stones of the
baby’s life are delayed. The baby is also somewhat deficient and mentally idiotic.
The baby sweats profusely and takes cold readily as a consequence. The sweat is well-marked in the BACK OF THE HEAD, NECK OR CHEST and upper part of the body. HEAD SWEATS PROFUSELY
WHILE SLEEPING, WETTING THE PILLOW FAR AROUND (next to Calc.—Sil.).
The baby has tubercular diathesis with enlarged glands. The baby wants to be magnetised (Phos.)

General Modality :
Aggravation: Cold air, wet weather, cold water, from washing, in morning, during full moon.
Amelioration: Lying on painful side (Bryonia., Puls.).

Relations :
It antidotes: Bismuth, Dig., Nitric acid, Nux vom, and Sulphur.Antidoted by: Acetic acid, China, Nitric acd, Camphor and Ipec.
Calcarea is the chronic of Belladonna.

Complementary to: Belladonna.
Should never be used before Sulphur. Acts best after Sulphur.Should not be repeated.
But in children it may be repeated in low potency.
Follows well: Cham., Con., Cup., Nit. ac., Nux., Puls. and Sulphur.
Followed well by: Lyc., Nux., Phos., Plat, and Sil.
Incompatible: Bry.
Do you know?
Sulphur has heat in patches, Calcarea has cold in patches and Kent says, sweat also in patches.
Calcarea grows and cures polypi.
Calcarea babies are always more or less wormy.


chapter 56 : CALCAREA FLUORICUM
Fluoride of Time J.B. BELL Caf,

INTRODUCTION
This is one of the twelve tissue remedies introduced by schussler. Homeopathic proving
was done by Dr. J.B. Bell on himself & others in 1874. It is a great polychrest & has got a
powerful hold on the human economy. Calc fluor is long and deep acting constitutional remedy for
hard stony glands, varicose & enlarged veins & malnutrition of bones etc. It is found in the
surface of bones, in the enamel of teeth, in elastic fibres & in the cells of epidermis.

CLINICAL
Adenoids, Aneurism, Affections of Bone, of Glands, Cataract, Catarrrh, Constipation,
Corneal Opacities, Exostosis, Fissure, Fistula, Fib-radenoma of breasts, ganglion, Gum-
boils, Lun-bago, Rheumatism, Sprains, Syphilis, Tonsillitis, Varicose Veins.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Jt acts on bones, enamel of teeth, skin, connective tissues & vessels. Also acts on
lymph nodes, glands & fibrous tissues etc.

PATHOGENESIS
It causes relaxation & dilatation of elastic fibres of any portion of the vessels, ofconnective tissues or of the lymphatic system leading to haemorrhoidal tumors, varicose
veins, vascular tumors, indurated glands, uterine displacements, weakening of abdominal walls & hard, knotty tumor on the surface of the bones.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) This remedy acts favourably on hard, stony glands & varicose veins.
2) One of the powerful remedies for tumor in the female breast specially when it is hard & knotty.
3) In osseous growths & in suppuration of bones, it acts favourably after Silicea & Calc. Phos. have failed.
4) This has got marked action on the lower jaw producing necrosis & suppuration. Complications of Wisdom teeth.
5) Periosteal swelling due to congenital hereditary syphilis.
6) Carries &-necrosis of bones with boring pain & heat in parts resulting from congenital syphilis.
7) It is a good medicine for immature cataract & corneal opacity.
8) Lumbago due to strain, aggravation at rest and ameliora-tion after moving a little | & from warmth. J
9) Discharges from the suppurative processes are offensive, thick & greenish yellow.

 Mind : Great depression; groundless fear of financial ruin. Dispostion to set ahigher valueon money than natural to him.
PARTICULARS
Head & Scalp :
Hard excre@enses on the scalp. Cephal : haematoma. Ulcers of the scalp with callous, hard edges,
Cracking noise in head. Blood tumours of newborn infants on a rough bonybase.
Eyes:
Dimness of vision on overstraining the eyes. Conjunctivitis. Styes. Enlarged meibomian glands.Tumours on the eyelids. Flickering & sparks before the eyes. Subcutaneous palpebral cysts.

Ears:
Calcareous deposits on the tympani; Sclerosis of ossicles & petrous portion of temporal bone, withdeafness. Chronic Suppuration of middle ear. Copious, offensive, thick, greenish, lumpy, Yellow nasal
discharge. Osseous growths. Adenoid growths in postnasal space & pharynx, hypertrophy of Luchka’s tonsils.

‘Face:
Hard swelling on the cheek with pain or toothache. Hard swelling on jaw bone. Carries of malar bone with oozing of dark, offensive bloody fluid, swelling of bone on outer surface.

Mouth :
Gum-boil with hard swelling on the jaw, stony hard swelling on the jaw bone. Ulceratians of mouth & throat manifesting congenital hereditary syphilis.

Tongue :

Cracked appearance of the tongue with or without pain. Indurations of tongue, hardening aftet inflammation.

Teeth :

Delayed dentition in children. Enamel of teeth rough & deficient. Unnatural looseness of the teath with or without pain. Teeth become loose in their sockets.

Throat :

Follicular sore throat, plugs of mucus are continually forming in the crypts of the tonsils. Pain & burning in throat better by warm drinks & worse from cold drinks. Hypertrophy of Luschka’s tonsil. Uvula
relaxed causing irritation, tickling & cough.

Stomach :
Vomiting of undigested food. Acute indigestion from fatigue & brain fag. Cutting pain in liver better by motion.
Abdomen & Stool:
Constipation, inability to expel faeces. Fissure of the anus, intensely sore crack near the lower end of the bowel. Bleeding haemorrhoids. Itching of anus as from pin worms. Internal or blind piles frequently
with pain in back generally far down on the sacrum & constipation. Piles with presure of blood to the head. Diarrhoea in gouty subjects.

Male Sexual Organs :
Constant dribbling of seminal & prostatic fluid with dwindling of the testes. Indurated & nodular testes. Hydrocele.

Female Sexual Organs :
Displacements of the uterus. Dragging pain in the region of the uterus & thighs, bearing down of the uterus. Varicose veins of vulva. Uterine fibroid. Excessive menses with bearing down pain.

Circulatory organs :
Aneurism at an early stage may be reduced or kept in check by this remedy & Ferrum Phos provided that the idodide of potash had not been taken. Chief remedy for vascular tumours with dilated vessels.
Enlargement & hypertrophy of heart. Varicose & enlarged veins.

Neck :
Indurated glands of stony hardness. Small goitre.

Back :
Chronic cases of lumbago; worse on beginning to move & better by continued motion. Tired feeling & pain in lower part of the back, with sensation of fullness & burning with constipation.

Extremities :
Ganglia, or ewing’s tumour at the back of the wrist. Gouty enlargement of the joints of the fingers.Inflammation of knee joint. Chronic synovitis. Cracking in the joints. Osseous growths & enlargements
of bones with or without carries, particularly of traumatic origin.

Sleep :
Vivid dreams with sense of impending danger, unrefreshing sleep.

Skin :
Fissures or cracks on the palms of hands or hard skin with formation of crusts. Fissure of anus.Whitlow. Indolent fistulous ulcers, Secreting thick yellowpus. Swellings or indurated enlargements having
their seats in the fasciae & capsular ligaments of joints or in the tendons. Induration of stony hardness.
Hard, elevated edge of ulcers, surrounding skin, purple & swollen. Knots, Kernels, hardened glands in the
female breasts.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : In damp weather, during rest. On beginning to move.
Amelioration : Heat or warm applications, Continued motion.

chapter: 57 CALCAREA PHOSPHORICA
Phosphate of Lime HERING Calcium Phosphate 

INTRODUCTION
This remedy belongs to Schuessler’s Twelve Tissue Remedies. But since its introduction intothe Homoeopathic system, we remain indebted to Dr. Constantine Hering for a thorough proving of
this remedy. Being a tissue remedy, it is somewhat similar to Calcarea carb. andPhosphorus. The phosphorus element in this preparation seems-to change the temperament as
it acts best in spare subjects instead of fat, while it retains its wonderful power over tardy bones.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders. Anaemia, Ankle’s weakness, Back weakness, Bone affection, Brain- fag, Bright’s disease, Chorea, Cretinism, Debility,
Dentition, Diabetes, Epilepsy, Fistula, Gonorrhoea, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Menstrual troubles, Rheumatism, Rickets, Respiratory affection, Skin affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Main action of this drug is on those tissues of body which have more calcium and phosphorus contents, such as bones, teeth, etc. Glands, digestive system, female genital
organs also come within the domain of its action.

PATHOGENESIS
It produces a state of malnutrition because of defective assimilation in regard % calcium and phosphorys, leading to improper bone formation, ossification and bending
long bones, spinal curvature, delayed dentition, resulting in rickets, etc.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Adapted to persons who are pale, of dark complexion, dark hairand eyes; thin spare subjects instead of fat, emaciated body, sunken flabby abdomen, soft
bones bent disproportionately, enlarged head and long weak emaciated neck, unable support head.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.
Miasm: Psora is in the background.
Diathesis: Scrofulous and gouty diathesis.
GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Defective bone development ; Tendency of bones to curve, especially long bones,like tibia, fibula, ulna and radius. Non-union and malunion of bones.
, Fontanelles remain open too long, especially posterior fontanelles (Anterior fontanelles—Calc. carb.).
. Emaciated body with sunken flabby abdomen (Distended abdomen—Silicea).
, Weakness and relaxation—child is slow in learning to walk, on account of weak ankles, inability to stand.
. Craving for salted and smoked meat, ham, bacon, etc.
. Dyspepsia where pain is relieved by passing wind and temporary relief by eating.
. Complaints aggravate while thinking of them. (Baryta carb,, Gels.,Medo., Helonias dioica, Oxal.ac.).
. Fistual in ano alternates with chest complaints (Berb. vul., and Silicea).
. It is the most important remedy for chronic hydrocephalus and it may be given “aspreventive to the pregnant lady who had previously borne hydrocephalic babies.”Says Grauvogl.
. At every attempt to eat there is colicky pain in abdomen.
. Numbness and crawling sensation in different organs.
. Debility remaining after acute diseases (Psorinum).

 Mind : Bad effects after grief and vexation. Peevish, forgetful. Involuntary sighing (Ign.). Always wants to go somewhere. Complaints aggravates when thinking about
them (Baryta carb. Gels, Medo, Helon, Oxal. ac,—rev. Camphor and Helleborus).
Aliments from : Grief, disappointed love, over study, unpleasent news and getting wet.

PARTICULARS
Headache :
Causation: Of gastric origin, abdominal flatulence, and mental exertion.
Location: Headache maximum near the region of sutures.
Character of headache: Headache of school girls, at about puberty (Natrum mur., Psorinum,Tuber.). Head is hot with smartingat roots of hair.
Modalities:
© Aggravation: On change of weather and after eating.
© Amelioration: During rest.
Abdomen :
Colicky pain in abdomen at every attempt to eat. Abdomen is sunken and flabby. During colic,Soreness and burning yaround navel. Flatulence temporarily, relieved after sour eructation.
Stomach :
Craves smoked and salted meat and salty food Great hunger with thirst.
Diarrhoea :
Causation: During 1st and 2nd dentition after taking juicy fruits.
Character of .stool: Greenish, slimy, hot, spluttering, undigested with foetid flatus and fishy odour,
Respiratory system :
For suffocative cough, relieved when lying down, calc. phos., is a good medicine. The patient may also have involuntary sighing (Ign.).
Rheumatism :
Causation: After getting wet in rain (Phyto., Rhus tox.).
Location: Pain in joints and various other parts.
Character: Stiffness and pain with cold numb feeling.
Modalities:
Aggravation: By any change of weather, winter, by motion and exertion.
Amelioration: During spring, summer dry warm weather and rest.
Menses :Too early, excessively bright flow, first bright then of dark blood with violent backache and
nymphomania (Plat.).
Leucorrhoea :
Like white of an egg aggravated in the morning.
Baby :
Calcarea phos. is especially suited to a psoric baby who is highly chilly, having scrofulous diathesis.
Look of the baby: Baby is tall, scrawny and emaciated having ENLARGED HEAD, OPEN FONTANELLES AND SUTURES, but with sunken and flabby abdomen.
Bone symptoms: Rachitic baby with OPEN FONTANELLES’AND SUTURES which remain open
for a time or close and re-open. The baby is uanble to stand; is slow in learning to walk; neck is weak and hance unable fo support the BIG HEAD: cranial bones thin and brittle- spine WEAK AND DISPOSED
TO CURVATURE. The spine is so weak in lumber region that the child cannot sit upright unles the back is supported.

Dentition: Dentition difficult, delayed or complicated.
Mind: Mentally the baby is very much peevish and fretful; wants to go home like Bry. and when at home, wants to go out.
Desire: There is intense craving for salted and smoked meat.
Stool: The baby usually suffers from spluttering diarrhoea; the character of stool being greenish, watery, hot, slimy, foetid, containing undigested food particles. Very offensive flatus may also pass along
with or independent of stool.
General Modalities :
Aggravation: Exposure to damp cold weather, melting snow, from every change of weather.
Amelioration: Summer and dry warm weather.
Relations :
Complementary to: Ruta and Hepar sulph.
Follows well: Ars., lod., Merc.
Followed well by: Sulphur.


CHAPTER :58 CALENDULA OFFICINALIS
Marigold Compositae
INTRODUCTION

Calendula is our favourite marigold. The mother tincture is prepared from its leaves and
flowers, together with blooms and buds. IT IS A GREAT HOMOEOPATHIC ANTISEPTIC. It
restores vitality of an injured part. Unlike Arnica, it has no irritating property and
consequently not capable of producing erysipelas. It is, therefore, suitable to all cases of injuries
where the skin is broken. It prevents suppuration and brings about healing promptly. It can also be
used externally with wonderful results. Calendula is a great healing agent in our Materia
Medica and it ranks first in our Homoeopathic surgical and first aid box for sueh conditions.

CLINICAL
Abscess, Burns, Carbuncles, Chillblains, Eye inflammation, Glandular affection, Injuries, Suppuration, Ulcers, Wounds, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts on muscles, tendons, nerves, scalp, skin, etc.

PATHOGENESIS
Its action on the muscles, tendons, nerves, etc. produces a condition similar to
lacerated injuries with solution of continuity of skin with suppuration.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
, Calendula is almost specific for clean cut, surgical cuts or lacerated wounds or suppurating wounds, It prevents suppuration, promotes healthy granulation of tissues
and rapid healing by first intention.
.Pain is excessive and out of all proportion to injury due to probable nerve involvement,
. Constitutional tendency to erysipelas,
, It can be used in the case of cancer as an intercurrent remedy.
. It is an excellent haemostatic in tooth extraction (Bov., Ham., Phos),

Ailments from : Loss of blood and post surgical injury.
PARTICULARS
Injury :
Causation: Clean cut injury, amputation, surgical operation, lacerated wounds, during labour,extraction of teeth, fracture of bones, etc.

Character of injury: Calendula it used in all cases of loss of soft parts, when union cannot be effected by means of adhesive plaster. Rupture of muscles or tendons, laceration and perineal tear during
labour; wounds penetrating articulations with loss of synovial fluids.

External wounds with or without loss of substance; torn and jagged looking wounds; post surgical operation; to promote healthy granulation and prevent excessive suppuration and disfiguring scars.

Exhausted from loss of blood (China, Ham.) and excessive pain. Traumatic and idiopathic neuroma; neuritis from lacerated wounds (Hypericum), after amputation (Cepa, Calc. phos.). Bleeding from
extraction of teeth (Arn., Bov., Ham. and Phos).
For old neglected, offensive injuries, threatening to a gangrenous condition, Calendula is ideally suited.

Ulcers :
Irritable, inflamed, sloughing and excessive secretion of pus; painful as if beaten (Am.), ulcers of varicose vein. Calendula has remarkable power to produce local exudation and helps acrid discharge and
makes ulcers healthy and clean. It has good reputation for external application in any cut or open wound surface or in any. ulcer. Calendula mother tincture, lotion or liniment can be applied externally.
General Modalities :
Worse in damp cloudy weather.
Relations :
Antidoted by: Arnica.
Calendula is complementary to: Hepar sulph.
Follows well: Ars. alb.
Followed well by: Arn. and Hepar,
N.B. : Hot calendula lotions are generally preferable to a cold one. Hot calendula fermentations are
better than poultices in the case of abscesses,

CHAPTER :59 CAMPHORA
Camphor HAHNEMANN CgH,,OzLauraceae

INTRODUCTION
Camphor is another medicine that .should be in every house for emergency use, but “Keep it in
the bathroom.” Dr. Tyler very sophistically remarks in her Drug picture. She adds “don’t let
Camphor come near any of your medicines, for it antidotes most, if not all of them. It is one of the
repidly acting and short lasting medicines) hence requires very frequent repetition.” Master
Hahnemann who introduced this drug, tells us that though powerful, it is more transient than
any other drug. Therefore, it needs very frequent repetition till reaction is ensured. In cholera the
medicine is to be repeated every five minutes till warmth is restored.

CLINICAL
Cholera Asatica, Convulsion, Epilepsy,Suppressed eruption, Erysipelas, Gonorrhoea, Hyperpyrexia, Measles and _ its
Complications and sequelae, Rheumatism, Strangury, Urinary affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Acts especially on the digestive tract, cerebro-spinal nerves and urinary organs i.e. kidney.

PATHOGENESIS
It does not create much dehydration, either by stool or by vomiting or by sweat. It also causes delirium, stupor with epileptiform convulsion. Collapsed condition is due te
circulatory failure.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: There is no particular make up of the body as such, But it is especially suited to those persons who are exceedingly sensitive to cold air, persons
physically and mentally very weak.

Temperament: Irritable temperament,
Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient; very much sensitive to cold air.

Miasm: Psora is in the background. 


GUIDING SYMPTOMS
.Camphor is the UNIVERSAL ANTIDOTE TO THE MEDICINES PREPARED FROM VEGETABLE KINGDOM.
. The patient is exceedingly sensitive to cold air (Hepar. sulph., Nux vom., Kali carb. and Rumex).
. Surface cold to touch, chilliness, yet cannot bear to be covered, throws off
. all the coverings (Secale cor., Med., wants covering,—Hepar, Psor., Nux Vom. and Rumex).
. Collapsed condition with coldness and lividity are the leading features of Camphor.
. Pain is better while thinking of it. (Hell.), (Worse, Calc. phos.. Baryta carb., Medo.and Gels.)
. Profound prostration with rapid sinking of strength.
. Scantiness of discharges: e.g. diarrhoea, vomiting, sweat, urine, etc. is characteristic to Camphor and Camphor only.
. Entire body painfully sensitive to slight touch (Kali carb. and Spigelia).
. Camphor has internal heat and external coldness.
.Cramps with icy coldness of limbs is a characteristic of Camphor.
.Repercussed eruption of measles and scarlatina. In all sequelae of measles.
.Camphor is indicated in many conditions of sudden collapse from over powering influence.
.Bad effects of shock from injury, eruptions suppressed, cold air, sunstroke and vexation.

Mind : Mentally there is great anxiety and extreme fear, fear of persons, of strange atmospheres, of darkness. The patient goes into a state of imbecility. The
appearence is, as if it had come on slowly. There is delirious condition, with heat,rage and mania; anxiety, tosses about anxiously in bed with almost loss of
conciousness.

PARTICULARS

Cholera :
 It typifies the collapse stage of Asiatic Cholera, says Dr. N.M. Chowdhury.
 Stage: In the first stage of Cholera morbus and Asiatic Cholera.
 Onset: Sudden attack of vomiting and diarrhoea.
 Quantity: There is not much discharge from the bowels, not much vomiting, sweat and urine,but suddenly the patient coLLAPsEs..
 Great coldness of surface, body cold to touch yet cannot bear to be covered. Throws off
 all the coverings. With collapse, there is great prostration and rapid sinking of strength.

Character of discharge: Stool rice-watery, involuntary, blackish, dark brown, faeces like coffee-ground, SCANTY with great tenesmus.
There is great retching and straining to vomit with SCANTY DISCHARGE.
Cramps: There are cramps in .the stomach and bowels spreading to other parts of the body, especially in calf muscles.
Look of the face: The face is cold, blue and shrivelled, very much anxious and pale.
Sweat: There is scanty sweat which is cold, all over the body, but more on the forehead, (Ver, alb.).
Tongue: The tongue is cold, flabby and trembling with cold breath
Pulse: Weak, small, slow, scarcely perceptible.

It differs in cholera from Cuprum and Veratrum album.

In Camphor, there is great PROSTRATION, BLUENESS, COLDNESS of the body and the body is cold and dry, yet the patient wants to be uncovered. And all the discharges are SCANTY.
In Cuprum, there is not so much prostration and coldness but there is more cramping and more convulsive tendency. So, the more the cramping the better the Cuprum is indicated,
In Ver. Alb., the more copius the discharge from bowels and the more profuse the vomiting and ‘sweat.
So scanty, cold and dry is Camphor; cold and copiousn discharge is Ver.alb.
The collapse of Camphor is sudden and overwhelming but not so in Ver. alb., due to excess oi purging and vomiting.
 Fever:
In eruptive fever, especially in measles, the face is pale, blue, cold and hippocratic face. The body is cold to touch, still the patient likes to he uncovered.
When eurptions do not appear or in repercussed eruption of measles and scarlatina, in all Sequelae of measles, Camphor is a great remedy.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: By motion, at night and in cold air.
Amelioration ; When thinking of exsiting complaints and warm air,
Relations :
Camphor antidotes nearly every vegetable medicine, tobacco, and opium.
Compare: Veratrum, Secale and Cuprum in cholera.
Antidoted by: Dulc., Phos. and Op.


CHEAPTER 60 CANNABIS INDICA
Indian Hemp. Urticaceae

INTRODUCTION
Cannabis Indica is said to be botanicallyidentical with Cannabis Sativa, “the difference in
soil and climate being responsible for thedifference in their properties”. Indeed, many
writers “lump” them together, as if there is nodifferences,— but it is Cannabis Indica which
provides such an extra ordinary wealth of mentalsymptoms and which is so astonishingly curative
wherever these provide the indications. Ourwriters seem to have given up can. Indica in
despair, probably because of the redundancy ofits mental aberrations.

CLINICAL

Catalepsy. Chordee. Clairvoyance. Delirium tremens. Delusions. Epilepsy.Gonorrhoea. Headache. Mania. Menorrhagia. Paralysis. Pros-tatitis. Satyriasis.
Stammering. Urinary diseases.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS : MIND :
.Very forgetful—forgets his last words and ideas; begins a sentence, forgets what he intends to speak, inability to recall any thought or event on account of
other thoughts crowding his brain (Anac., Lac. C.)
. Constantly theorizing.
. Laughs immoderately at every trifling word spoken to him.
. Full of fun and mischief, then perhaps moaning and crying.
. Great apprehension of approaching death.
. Delirium tremens, excessive loquacity, exaggeration of time and distance.
. Time seems too long (Arg. N.) a few seconds seem ages.
.Distance seems immense, a few rods seem miles.
. Sensation as if the calvarium was opening and shutting (Act.)
. Sensation of swelling in the perineum or near the anus, as if sitting on a ball (with great quantities of ropy mucus in urine-Cinch)
. Limbs and parts seem enlarged.
. Wonderful imaginations and hallucinations.
. Quickness of ideas and pleasant sensations.—constant succession of new ideas, each of which was instantly forgotten.
. Imagines that he is possessed of infinite knowledge and power of vision.
. Uncontrollable laughter, till the face becomes purple and the back and loins ache.
. Constant fear of becoming insane.
. Horror of darkness.

PARTICULARS
Head:
Sensation as if top of head were opening & shutting and as if calvarium were beinglifted. There is involuntary shaking of head. Uraemic headache & when associated with flatulency.
Un-usual excitment with loquacity usually precedes the attack of migrain.

Face :
Expression : drowsy & stupid.
Mouth and lips dry Lips glued together. Saliva thick, frothy & sticky.
Grinding of teeth during sleep.

Stomach :
Sensation of extreme tension in abdominal vessels as if bursting. Appetite increased. Pain at cardiac
oriPco oetter by pressure. Pyloric spasm.

Urinary Symptoms :
Stitches and burning in urethra. Dull pain in region of right kidney. Dribbling urine, patient must
strain. He has to wait some time before the urine flows. (Nat. Mur.) Urine loaded with slimy mucus.

Sexual Symptoms :
Male : Backache after sexual intercourse. Oozing of white glairy mucus from glans. Satyriasis Chordee. Prolonged thrill.
Female : Menses Profuse, dark, painful, without clots. Backache during menses. Uterine colic, with great nervous agitation & sleeplessness. Dysmenorrhoea with sexual desire.
Extremities : Pain across shoulders and spine. Must stoop; can not walk erect. Thrillirg through arms and hands and from knees down. Entire paralysis of the lower extremities.
Pains in soles, calves, ankles and knees ; very exhausted after a short walk.
Sleep : Obstinate and intractable forms of insomnia, Catalepsy. Nightmare. Dreams of dead bodies: 
Very sleepy but unable to sleep.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : Morning, from coffee, liquor, and tobacco, lying on right side. Amelioration :Fro™fresh air, cold water, rest.
Relations :
Compare : Bell, Hyos. Stram.


CHEAPER : 61 CANNABIS SATIVA
American Hemp HAHNEMANN Urticaceae

INTRODUCTION
This European and American Hemp is said to be botanically identical with Cannabis Indica. Both of
them belong to the same natural order. The difference in soil, and climate is responsible for the difference in
their properties. Cannabis saliva was first introduced accidentally in the field of Homoeopathic therapeutics
by Dr. O. Shaughsessy who also described the effects of the Indian hemp, Cannabis Indica.

CLINICAL
Asthma, Constipation, Gonorrhoea, Respiratory affection, Urinary affections etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts chiefly upon the urinary organs, especially the mucous lining of the urethra,sexual and respiratory organs.

PATHOGENESIS
It causes excessive irritation followed by inflammation of the mucous membrane of urethral passage producing mucus-like discharge, the whole condition closely simulating Gonorrhoea.

CONSTITUTION
There is no particular constitution of the patient as such. However, there is sycotic and syphilitic background for the troubles.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
.Acute inflammatory first stage of gonorrhoea.
. Urethra is very sensitive to touch and pressure. Cannot walk with legs close together. They hurt the urethra.
. There is tearing pain along the urethra in zigzag direction.
. Pain extends from external orifice of the urethra backwards, burning and bitting.Pain while urinating.
. Obstinate constipation causing retention of urine, with constriction of anus.
. Dyspnoea or asthma where the patient can breathe better only by standing up.
. Choking in swallowing; things “go down the wrong way.”
. Sensation as of drops of water are falling on or from a single part; on the head, from anus, stomach, heart, etc.
. Ailments from : Gonorrhoea.

PARTICULARS

Urinary Symptoms :
Cannabis sativa is adapted to urinary troubles, arising from or brought on by gonorrhoea, the cardinal symptoms of which are as follows:
Stage: In acute and inflammatory stage of gonorrhoea especially in the first stage; in urethritis,
Urethra is very much sensitive to touch and pressure. Cannot walk with legs close together.Keeps the legs wide apart because touch hurts the urethra.

Sensation: “Burning” sensation in urethra during and after urination.

Character of pain: Stiching and tearing pain along the urethra in a zigzag direction. Pain extending from orifice of urethra to backwards; burning and bitting while urinating. There is frequent, violent and
constant urging to urinate.

During urination: Most painful and diffucult urination. There is stitching pain in urethra while the urine flows. Violent pain at the close of urination.

After urination: Pressing out feeling at the orfice of the urethra after urination.

Character of Urine: Urine is mixed with blood; scalds when passing; there is thick, yellowish gonorrhoeal discharge from the urethra.

Modality: Aggravation from touch.

Respiratory symptoms :
Suited especially in bronchitis and asthma.
Sensation: There is sensation of weight on the chest.

Character of cough: Rattling cough with wheezing and dyspnoea where the patient can breathe
better only by standing up. Must have windows open.

Character of Sputa; Cough with green viscid expectoration, salty sputa with blood spifting.
Character of pain; During coughing there is Stiching pain in the chest.

Modéalities:
* Aggravation: By lying down.
© Amelioration: By standing up.
For threatened abortion complicated with gonorrhoea, this drug is an excellent remedy.
There may also be sexual over excitement in elther sex.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: From lying down and going upstairs.
Amelioration: By standing up.

Relations :
Antidotes: Camphor and Merc.
Similar to: Cantharis and Cup. met.

 CHAPTER 62 : CANTHARIDES
Spanish Flies HAHNEMANN Cantharideae

INTRODUCTION
This medicine is prepared from the Spanish Fly by reducing into a course powder and
saturating it later with alcohol to prepare the mother tincture. It was first introduced into the
parlance of Homoeopathy by our Master Hahnemann. To stress its importance, Dr. Tyler remarks “ANOTHER VEHEMENT DRUG OF STORM AND _ STRESS” tempered by
Hahnemann. Cantharides in its crude form is a powerful irritant and is hardly ever used
internally. After Homoeopathic proving, the same irritant drug is used for an irritant disorder on the basis of Homoepathic Law “Similia Similibus Curantur”.

CLINICAL
Bladder affection, Burns, Dysentery, Diarrhoea, Gonorrhoea, Kidney troubles, Neuralgia, Pleurisy, Pregnancy troubles, Haematuria. Skin affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts especially on urinary organs, urinary bladder, urethra, ureters, skin, respiratory system and gastro-intestinal canal.

PATHOGENESIS
It especially affects the urinary and sexual organs and prevents their function by setting up violent inflammation. It also causes inflammation of the whole gastro
intestinal canal, especially of lower bowels. Inflammation produced by Cantharides on lower bowels, kidneys, ovaries, meninges, pleura or pericardium is usually
ASSOCIATED WITH BLADDER IRRITATION.
GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. “Burning” in every part of the body; both internal and external, run through the whole remedy.
. Constant and intolerable uriging to urinate before, during and after urination is the key-note of Cantharides,
. Burning and cutting pain in urethra during micturition,
. Oversensitiveness of all parts.
. There is haemorrhage from nose, mouth, intestine, genital and urinary organs.
. Stool with scraping of intestine (Colchicum and Arg. nit.).
. Gastric complaints that are aggravated by drinking coffee (Boericke).
. Disgust for everything, drink, food, tobacco.
. Drinking even a small quantity of water increases pain in the bladder.
. Violent lancinating pains through, the kidney and back (Kent).
. Tenacious and ropy mucus from air passages (Kali bi.) with urinary symptoms.
. Aggravation from dazzling objects and by water, a typcial picture of hydrophobia(Nash).
, Cantharides expels moles, dead foetus, placenta and promotes fecundity(Guernsey).
. There is violent sexual desire.

PARTICULARS
Dysentery :
Cantharides is a good medicine for dysentery.
Before stool There is great urging for stool with violent colicky pain in the abdornen.
During stool. There is severe burning and cutting pain in the anus.
After stool: After stool colic is alleviated, but the tenesmus continues with great shuddering.
Character of Stool: White mucus like scraping of intestine, bloody mucus with streaks of blood or frank blood.
Concomitants: Dysentery is associated with dysuria.

Urinary Symptoms :

In whatever diseases or urinary complaints, such as urethritis, cystitis or renal colic, gonorrhoea, etc.. it matters little, if the following symptoms are present, Cantharides can be thought of'as an effective remedy.
Constant urging to urinate before, during and after micturition.Only a few drops of urine pass at a time.

There is VIOLENT TENESMUS. 
Burning during urination is always present.

Oversenstiveness of parts is well marked.

Haematuria :

Blood passes with urine. Aggravation after drinking coffee or cold water.

Character of pain: There \s violent pain WITH FREQUENT URGING TO URINATE. Cutting. lancinating and stabbing pain as from knives, in neck of bladder. Pain shoots off in different directions.
There is burning and cutting pain in urethra during micturition with VIOLENT TENESMUS: Violent lancinating pains through the kidneys and back. Over sensitiveness of the parts. There is sever
pain on urinating so that the patient screams on passing every drop.

Character of urine: Bloody urine; comes drop by drop. Urine scalds the passage; jelry like, shreddy urine.
There is retention or suppression of urine. Passes only a drop or two at a time.

Modalities:
  Aggravation : During urination, from touch, drinking cold water or coffee.
  Amelioration: By rubbing warm application (Clarke).

In gonorrhoea, there is violent burning and tenesmus of the bladder. There is severe cutting burning pain while urinating. The urine burns like fire in the bladder and about the genitals.

Skin :
Cantharides is usually indicated in burns, scalds and erysipelas.
Sensation: There is burning and raw sensation.

Look of skin: Inflamed with bleb formation. There is vesicular erysipelas with vesicles all over the body which are sore and suppurating.
Pain: There is severe burning pain with itching and smarting.

Modalities: Worse from touch and relieved by cold application (Boericke). Cantharides can be used externally also in burns before the blisters form and also when they have already formed. If the skin is
unbroken, Cantharides will promptly relieve pain and often prevent vesication.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : From touch, urinating, drinking cold water or coffee.
Amelioration: By rubbing.
Relation :
Antidotes: Aconite, Camphor and Pulsatilla.
GAPOILUM

CHAPTER :63 Cayenne or HAHNEMANN Solanaceae  Red Pepper 

INTRODUCTION

Master Hahnemann says—this Spanish pepper as it is called, was introduced as a spice to
season the sauces and to work as an appetiser. But in the rational therapeutic sphere, it has
gained enough deserving name and fame by its characteristic, though limited sphere of action.
Dr. Tyler remarks in regard to this remedy “these remedies of limited, but curious and
unique action, are most useful where they fit, one may need them seldom, But yet nothing on earth
will take their place where symptoms demand them”.

CLINICAL
Asthma, Abdominal disorders, Brain affection, Cough, Delirium, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Ear affection, Headache, Haemorrhoids, Home
sickness, Fevers, Lung affection, Pregnancy troubles, Rheumatism, Sciatica, Throat affection, Urinary troubles, Whooping cough.
Tonsillitis, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Capsicum affects principally mucous membranes e.g. of mouth tongue, abdomen. bowels, rectum, etc. Chest, lungs and skin may also be affected in rare instances. It also
affects the bones, particularly bones of the ear.

PATHOGENESIS
It produces inflammation of mucous membrane with mucus discharge from bowels throat, etc. It also causes well marked chill, fever and neuralgia with threatening dee?
seated abscesses.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Especially suited to fatty persons with light hair, blue eyes, stout and plethorie who easily get exhausted, indolent, dread of any kind of exercise, persoDs
inclined to be jovial, yet angry at trifles. Children dread open air. A Capsicum child 8 fatty, dirty, clumsy, and is always chilly.
Temperament: Nervous temperament.

Capsicum 177

Relation with heat and Cold: CHILLY PATIENT.
Miasm: Psora is in the background.
Diathesis: Phlegmatic.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
, Burning and smarting sensation in the throat and other parts, not relieved by heat whereas aggravated from cold water (Clarke).
. Constriction in faces, throat, nares, chest, bladder, urethra and rectum.
. Pain in distanat parts on coughing e.g. bladder, knees, legs, ears, etc.
. The burning, spasmodic constriction and all other pains are worse between the acts of degulutition (Ign.).
. Every stool is followed by thirst and every drink is fallowed by shuddering.
. Burning is aggravated by application of cold water and slightest draught of cold air, but not relieved by heat.
. Home-sickness with red cheeks and sleepiness (Ign. and Phosphoric acid); much hot feeling in faces.

Mind : Mentally there are many striking features in Capsicum, Home-sickness is well-marked which runs through the remedy with sleeplessness and red cheeks
There is persistent thought of suicide. He does not want to kill himself; he resists the thoughts which persist and he is tormented by these sad thoughts. The patient
is very taciturn, peevish and obstinate; great clumsiness and awkwardness,
excessive peevishness, wants to be left alone at home.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Sensation: Headache as if the head would fly to pieces, feels as if head were large.
Character of headache: Bursting and throbbing type of headache. Headache as if the brain would be pressed thorugh the forehead. Patient holds the head with hands.
Modalities:
 Aggravation: Moving the head, when walking or coughing and stepping.
 Amelioration: Lying down with head high.
Ear:
It has got peculiar action on the bones of the internal ear and MASTOID PROCESS. Location: Inflammation of mastoid, in mastoid abscess with swelling and behind the ears.
Character of pain: BURNING AND STINGING PAIN in the ears; aching and pressing pain with cough as if an abscess would burst.
Necrosis of the petrous portion of temporal bone and caries of the bones of ear, especially the mastoid process are successfully treated by capsicum.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :
Abdomen :
Dyspesia with great flatulence, sinking at the pit of stomach, nausea and vomiting.The patinet has great craving for stimulants.
There is much thirst, but drinking causes shuddering.There is buring and smarting sensation in the abdomen.
Dysentery :
It is one of the royal remedies for dysentery. Character of stool: The stool is full of mucus and blood. During stool there is stinging pain.
After stool the patient is thirsty with shuddering.
Every stool is followed by thrist and every drink by shuddering. There is drawing pain in the back
with great tenesmus, smarting and burning in anus and rectum.

Piles :
For bleeding, PILES WITH SORENESS IN ANUS, Capsicum is marvellous. There is stinging pain during stool. Haemorrhoids protrude with smarting and burning pain, smarting like pepper. PILES STING
AND BURN AS IF PEPPER had been sprinkled on them.
After stool, there is drawing pain in the back.

Respiratory symptoms :
Causation: After taking cold and exposure to cold.
Cough: There is dry, hacking and explosive cough.
Every time the patient coughs, and at no other time, there escapes a volume of pungent, foetid air
from his mouth.

Modality: Cough is more violent in evening and at night.
Concomitants: Pain at distant parts of body while coughing e.g. bladder, legs, ears, etc. Headache as if the head is going to burst. 3:
Tonsillitis :
In inflammation of throat and tonsils, Capsicum is a royal remedy.
Sensation: Hot feeling in fauces, constrictive feeling in throat. Burning and smarting sensation.
Look of the throat; The throat is dark red, swollen and inflamed.
Character of pain: Pain and dryness in throat, extending to the ears, Sore throat of smokers and drinkers. There is burning and smarting sensation as from cayenne pepper in the throat.
Modality:
Aggravation: Between acts of deglutition (Ign.) in case of burning spasmodic constriction and other pains.
|Hoarseness :In chronic hoarseness with constriction in the fauces and throat with buring, smarting pain, intense soreness, Capsicum is infallible.
There is burning and smarting sensation as from cayenne pepper in throat, not relieved by heat.

Intermittent fever :
Capsicum is a valuable remedy in intermittent fever.
The chill begins in the back. Thirst commences long before chill commences. There is great thirst, but drinking causes shivering and increase chilliness. The chill is relieved by heat, must have something
hot to cover up.
During the stage of chill, he becomes sensitive to noise. There is no thirst both in heat and sweat stages.
General Modalities :
Aggravation: From open air, uncovering and draughts of air.
Amelioration: While eating and from heat.
Relations :
Antidotes : Cina.
Compare: Lyco and Puts.

CHAPTER :64 CARBO ANIMALIS
Animal Charcoal Leather Charcoal

INTRODUCTION
It is one of the carbons and seems to be especially adapted to scrofulous and venous
constitutions, old people and after debilitating disease with feeble circula-tion and lowered vitality.

CLINICAL

Aneurism. Breast,—cancer of. Bubo. Cancer.Constipation. Cough. Eructations. Glandular indurations. Haemorrhoids, Headache.Leucorhoea. Pleurisy. Sprain, Uterus-cancer of.

SPHERES OF ACTION AND PATHOGENESIS
It acts on glands, blood vessels, respiratoy, gastrointestinal & genito urinary systems. Skin & extremities.

CONSTITUTION
Make up of the body. It is suited to old persons greatly debilitated especially when there is venous plethora and blueness of skin.
Heat cold Relation—Chilly patient.
Miasm—It covers all the three miasms psoric, Sycotic & syphilitic.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
.Diseases of elderly persons with marked venous plethora, blue cheeks, blue lips andgreat debility.
. Aversion to open, dry, cold air.
. Circulation feeble, Stagnated and vital heat sinks to a minimum.
.After appearance of menses so weak, she can hardly speak. (Alum. Coc.).
.Menstruation, leucorrhoea, diarrhoea are all exhausting. (Ars.-are all offensive Psor.).
.Glands : indurated, swollen, painful; in neck, axillae, groin, Mammae ; pains lancinating, cutting, burning (Con.)
. Easily strained from lifting, even small weights ; straining and overlifting easily produce great debility ; ankles turn when walking.
.Joints weak : easily sprained by slight exertion (Led.)
. Hearing confused ; cannot tell from what direction a sound comes.
. A stitchirig pain remains in chest after recovery from pleurisy (Ran. b.)

Mind : Desires to be alone, sad and reflective, avoids conversation. Anxiety at night, with orgasm of blood.
Ailments from: Loss of. Fluids. Lifting. Strain, Eating spoiled fish and decayed vegetables. Quinine.

PARTICULARS
Head :
Headache as if a tornado in head ; as if head had been blown to pieces ; has to sit up at night and hold it together. Rush of blood with confusion. Sensation as if something lay above eyes so that she could
not look up.

Stomach :
Weak empty feeling in the stomach is not relieved by eating. Burning & griping pain in stomach. Eating tires patient. Flatulence. Repugnance to fat food. Weak digestion. Pyrosis.
Complaints from eating spoiled fish and decayed vegetables.

Respiratory Symptoms :
Pleurisy assuming a typhoid character. A stitching pain remains in chest after recovery from pleurisy. Ulc-eration of lung with feeling of coldness of chest.

Cough with discharge of greenish pus.
Female :
Menses : Too early, frequent and long lasting. Flow only in the morning. After appearance of Menses so weak she can hardly speak. Burning in Vagina and labia.
Pregnancy : Nausea of pregnancy ; worse at night.
Breast : Painful indurations in breast especially right. Darting in breast. Cancer of uterus with burning pain down thighs.
Skin : Glands indurated, swollen, painful ; in neck, axillae, groin, mammae ; pains lancinating, cutting & burning.
Spongy uterus, copper coloured eruption. Acne rosacea. Warts on hands and face of old people with
bluish colour of extremities, Chilblains, worse in evening, in bed and from cold. Benign suppurations
change into ichorous or malignant conditions.

Extremities : Ankles turn easily, Straining and overlifting produce great debility. Joints weak; easily
sprained by slight exertion. Easily strained from lifting even small weights, Pain in coccyx ; burns when
touched.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : After shaving (after Brom.) ; Slightest touch ; after midnight.

Relations:
Complementary: Gale. phos. Similar to, Bad., Brom., Carbo V., Phos., Sep., Sulph.


CHAPTER :65 CARBO VEGETABILIS
Vegetable Charcoal HAHNEMANN Wood Charcoal

INTRODUCTION
Carbon is an important constituent of each and every cell in the human body. It maintains
the vitality and integrity of all the organs andtissues. Carbo veg. is indicated mainly in the 1st
and 2nd childhood and when the resistance of the body is low and is incapable of coping up with the external envtronment.
Carbo veg. is rather an “inert” substance which is made medicinally useful and a powerful agent of great helping value by fine trituration.
Its true latent power of helping is developed when it is sufficiently potentized.
It is a chronic, deep and long acting anti-psoric medicine which enters deeply into
life. It mainly affects the VENOUS SIDE OF THE ECONOMY producing symptoms of IMPERFECT OXIDATION, BLUENESS, ECCHYMOSIS AND _  PASSIAVE
HAEMORRHAGE resulting from deficient capillary circulation. It is mainly indicated in
the last stage of exhaustive diseases which result in disintegration and improper oxidation of the tissue with ‘air hunger’.

CLINICAL

Acidity, Acne, Angina pectoris. Aphonia, Asthma, Bronchitis, Carbuncle, Cancerous affection, Cholera, Constipation, Cough, Debility, Diarrhoea, Dentition, Dysentery,
Dyspepsia, Disorders of Pregnancy, Emphysema, Eructation, Epistaxis, Fevers, Flatulence, Gangrene, Haemorrhage, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Heart affections, Lung affection,
Measles and Mumps, Orchitis, Otorrhoea, Stomach disorders, Skin affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Carbo veg. acts very particularly upon the sanguinous and nervous system and all the vegetative process of the body. Affects vascular system, particularly the venous side:
blood and capillary, mucous membrane, gastro-intestinal tract and lung.

PATHOGENESIS
It causes sluggishness, turbidity and swelling of the parts. Everything about the economy is sluggish, turbid distended and swollen, The head feels full and the limbs feel
dull and puffy. The veins are relaxed and paralysed. It also produces vaso-motor paralysis.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Persons of advanced age, women at turn of life; prematurely old people. Cachectic persons, young or old. The face is puffy, bluish, pale and hippocratic
with cold sweat.

Temperament: Sanguine temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient. Though the body is cold to touch, the patient WANTS constantly to be FANNED RAPIDLY AND FROM NEAR.

Miasm: It is a powerful anti-psoric remedy.
Diathesiss HAEMORRHAGIC DIATHESIS. Passive haemorrhage of black or dark blood from every orifice of the body e.g. bleeding from lung, bladder, uterus, stomach,
ulcers, etc. resulting from weakened circulation. Haemorrhagic tendency runs through the whole remedy.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Exhausted vitality from loss of vital fluid.
. The surface of the body is COLD TO TOUCH, especially from knee to feet. The pulse is intermittent, thready and imperceptible.
. Weak Digestion, SIMPLE FOOD DISAGREES causing excessive flatulence; abdomen is full to bursting point especially on the upper part; aggravation from
 least food and relief from eructation and on passing flatus. It is one of Nash’s Trio of tympanitic and flatulent drugs (others being Lyco. and China).
. In the last stage of any disease with copious cold sweat, cold breath, cold tongue,voice lost, this remedy may save a life.
. WANTS TO BE FANNED RAPIDLY AND FROM A CLOSE DISTANCE in nearly every complaint.
. Wants clothing loose around the abdomen (Lach. and Bovista).
. The patient craves things which makes him sick. Old toppers crave whisky or brandy.
. Hoarseness aggravated in the evening (Aconite, Phos. and Rumex).
. Sysmptoms of imperfect oxidation, resulting from deficient capillary circulation,causing blueness of skin and coldness of extremities.
. Constant sour and rancid eructation.
. Mind : Slowness of thought and weakness of memory, dislikes darkness and fears ghosts.
 Ailments from ;: Loss of vital fluid, mercury, salt, salted meat or fish and from abuse of quinine, especially suppressed chill and fever; bad effects of long ago
 injury, persons who have never fully recovered from the bad effects of some previous illness.

PARTICULARS

Stomach :
Simplest food disagrees due to weak digestion with excessive accumulation of gas in the stomach and intestine particularly in the epigastric region with frequent eructation and passing of flatus.
Causation: Alcohol, wine, spoiled meat, fish, fat, salt and salted meat.
Sensation: As if the abdomen will burst open due to accumulation of excessive gas.
Location: Especially in the upper part of the abdomen (stomach and transverse colon). (Lower abdomen-lyco, whole abdomen-china).

Modalities:
* Aggravation: By lying down, after eating and drinking, rich food, butter, milk, coffee, etc.
° Amelioration: From eructation and passing flatus.

Concomitants: Diarrhoea and cadaverous smelling stool with burning in the rectum.

Diarrhoea : It is suited to painful diarrhoea of old people.

Character of stool: Frequent, involuntary, cadaverous smelling stool followed by burning in rectum. Soft stool voided with difficulty.

Cholera :Carbo veg. is very useful in the COLLAPSE STAGE of cholera.

Causation: Caused by great drain of the vitality due to profuseness of its discharges.

Character of stool: There is frequent, involuntary cadaverous smelling stool, followel by burning.

Look of the face: Hippocratic face eyes are sunken, cheeks are sunken with earthy complexion.

Look of the skin: There is deficient capillary circulation causing blueness of skin and coldness of extremities, vital power nearly exhausted.

Sweats: There is COLD SWEAT ON the forehead with coldness of entire body.

Relation with fan: There is GREAT DESIRE TO BE CONSTANTLY FANNED RAPIDLY AND FROM A CLOSE DISTANCE.
If Carbo veg. is given in last stage with copious cold sweat, cold breath, cold tongue, voice
lost, this remedy may save a LIFE.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Causation: Low vitality and neglected pneumonia (China, Plumbum and Lyco.).

Character of Cough: Cough with tingling and itching in larynx causing spasmodic cough with gagging and vomiting. Hoarseness worse- in the evening; aphonia more in the morning with rawness, soreness and burning, wheezing and rattling of mucus in the chest.
Modality: Worse in the evening, open air, after eating and talking Relieved by CONSTANT FANNING FROM A CLOSE DISTANCE.


Haemorrhage :

Carbo veg. is a very important remedy for passive capillary bleeding where there is constant oozing of dark blood, except in case of nose where blood is brigt red.

Causation: Low vitality, weak or feeble heart wilth relaxation of blood vessels and vaso-motor

paralysis.

Location: Especially on the venous side of the economy.

Modality: Relief BY FANNING.

Concomitants: Cyanosis. Desire to be fanned continuously and form near which gives relief.

Skin :

Skin is cyanosed, cold and ecchymosed due to venous stasis. Moist skin with hot perspiration old and clammy sweat, itching falling of hair due to general weakneis after exhausting disease.
Senile gangrene which bleed easily and gives off foul smell. Bedsore which bleeds easily and gives off foul smell. Varicose ulcers due to feeble circulation with burning pain.
Carbuncle purple in appearance with burning pain which imparts offensive smell: aggravated by heat and relieved by cold application. Ulceration of skin and mucous membrane from injury which does not heal readily due to relaxation of the blood vessels and feebleness of the tissue.
The ulcers give out a bloody, ichorous, acrid and thin discharge with offensive smell.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In the evening, in open air, from cold, from hot food, butter, coffee, milk, warm damp weather and alcoholic drinks.

Amelioration: From eructation, from fanning rapidly and from a close distance and by cold
application.
Relations :
Complementary to: China, Kali carb, and Drosera.

Antidotes; Camphor, Arsenic, Lachesis and Coffee.

Antidoted by: Ars., Camphor, Lach., Ferr. m.

N.B. Carbo veg. is the “Homoeopathic Last Aid”.


chapter 66 CARBOLIC ACID

Glacial Carbolic Acid HAHNEMANN CoHs0H

INTRODUCTION

Carbolic acid is a great antiseptic and powerful irritant. In its crude form, it is capable of poisoning. This property hadled Hahnemann to potentise this drug for the cure of various
ailments. The potencies of Carbolic acid are made with alcohol, an exception to the rule for preparation of acids.

CLINICAL
Abdominal affection, Burns, Carbuncles, Cholera,Constipation, Diabetes, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Dyspepsia, Flatulence, Fever, Gangrene, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Skin affection, Small-pox, Uraemia, Urinary affection, Ulcers, Vomiting, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on nervous system, skin, all mucous membranes, especially of mouth, throat, gastro-intestinal tract and urinary organs.

PATHOGENESIS

It acts primarily on nervous system and produces deadly paralysis of respiratorycentres and various consequent reflex symptoms. It causes much debility and weakness.
It also produces inflammation of the skin resulting in ulceration and malignant manifestations of all mucous membranes and gastro-intestinal tract, in addition to
vomiting, dysentery, etc.

CONSTITUTION ;

Physical make-up: There is no particular constitution for this drug. Persons of any and every constitution are susceptible tcvthis remedy. The patient is however, VERY
CHILLY, having SYPHILITIC AND PSORIC BACKGROUND and is of irritable temperament.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. As in the case of all acids. DEBILITY AND WEAKNESS ARE very common symptoms; hence in Carbolic acid too, these symptoms are persistently present throughout.

2. Pains come suddenly, last for a short time and disappear suddenly, (Bell, Mag:phos.). Pains are burning, pricking and stitching,

3. The whole surface of the body is bathed in cold sweat with prostration and collaspe.

4. Sensation of band around the forehead, with dull and heavy frontal headache.

5. Ulceration all over the body and in internal parts, such as mouth, nose, throat,nostrils, rectum, vagina, from which a discharge comes out which is very offensive and putrid.

6. Great longing for whisky and tobacco.

7. It has cured cases of cancer of stomach and has apparently cured epithelioma of cheeks and nose with haemorrhage (Allen).

8. Constipation with HORRIBLY OFFENSIVE BREATH.

9. In dysentery, stool contains scraping of intestine (Cantharides, Colchicum).

10. Carbolic acid 30 is of great help in uterine displacement with or without discharge (Deschere). 

Cooper regards it specific in influenza in 3x potency for attack and 30 potency for resulting debility.

Particulars

Headache :
Location: There is dull and heavy frontal headache.

Sensation: During headache, the patient feels that there is a rubber band stretched tightly over the forehead from temple to temple (Anac., Sulphur).

Character: The headache is dull and heavy.

Concomitants: Along with the headache, the patient is very much prostrated, weak and debilitated.

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : Ulcerated putrid mouth is often found in Carbolic acid patients. THE BREATH IS VERY OFFENSIVE with bad taste in mouth, due to constipation.

Vomiting : Of drunkards or in pregnancy, in sea sickness or in cancerous condition of stomach.The character of the vomitus is dark or olive-green and very offensive.

Dysentery : The stool contains fluid mucus, like the scraping of intestinal mucosa. There will also be great tenesmus. The stool is very thin, involuntary; black and offensive.

Constipation : Along with the general character of constipation, in Carbolic acid, THERE IS HORRIBLY OFFENSIVE BREATH during constipation.

Leucorrhoea : is very copious, acrid, offensive and greenish.

Urine : Very dark, black or blackish olive-green.

Ulcers : There is great tendency to ulceration anywhere and everywhere, such as in skin, mouth,Nose, nostrils, throat, rectum, vagina, etc. From the ulcer, putrid and a very offensive discharge comes out continuously.
Burns lead to ulceration with ichorous discharge. There may be malignant scarlatina and variola. Various abscesses appear on different parts of the body consequent upon physical exertion, even by much
walking, but generally on the right ear. The ulcers are very painful. The pain comes suddenly, lasts  FORa short time and disappears suddenly. Carbolic acid is also an excellent remedy for lacerated wounds
with blunt instruments. Bones may be bare or crushed with niuch sloughing of soft parts. The patient craves both whisky (Syph.). and tobacco (Staphisagria).

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From cold in general.

Relations :

Compare: In burns with Arsenic and Kreosote, In ulcers with unhealthy offensive discharge with Merc. Sol., and Sulphur. Carbolic. acid is antidoted by dilute cider vinegar either externally or internally, when acid has been swallowed accidentally or taken for suicidal purposes.
Dr. R.K. Ghosh finds it admirable in cases of Cholera where Veratrum album seems indicated but fails (Clarke).


chapter 67 : CARCINOSIN

The nosode of Carcinosin (generally of breast or stomach)

INTRODUCTION
Carcinosin is one of the principal nosodes of cancer and is one of Dr. Burnett’s different cancer preparations. Dr. D. M. Foubister is the chief authority for its homoeopathic uses. We are greatly indebted to Dr. Foubister for our knowledge of Carcinosin. One
learns more about this medicine from his famous “The Carcinosin Drug Picture”. He had been its chief exponent and had conducted extensive provings to give Car-cinosin a stable position in our Materia Medica. He proved it himself in the 200th potency. It is most
commonly indicated and deep acting, constitutional polychrest medicine. It can be said that Carcinosin is a drug of many combinations, of great contradiction and of alterations of symptoms (ike Lac. Can.)

CONSTITUTION :

Appearance : Brownish—Brownish “cafe an tail” complexion having blue sclerotics and numerous moles. There may be both fair and dark complexion, bulky and emaciated body, having multiple warts or some birth marks anywhere in the body.
Thermal Interpretation :The patient may be chilly or hot or is affected by both extremes of heat and cold.

Temperament: Suited to every temperament.

Miasms :Psora, sycosis, syphilis, all three miasms are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :
. When apparently well indicated remedies even nosodes like psorinum,Medorrhinum, Syphilinum & Tuber-culinum fail to cure a case or produce a temporary amelioration of all   the symptoms Carcinosin acts as a complementary drug,
. When two or more remedies are partially indicated with-out complete coverage by and single one, Carcinosin should be considered.
. Family history of cancer—Diabetes Mellitus, Tuber-culosis, Pernicious anaemia,syphilis or any other degenerative condition is traced—there may be or may not be such   history, if symptoms agree ‘Carcinosin’ should be thought of.
. Personal history of recurrent attacks of bronchitis, pneumonia, whooping cough in childhood, even ten-dency to suffer repeatedly from measles, chicken pox,   diptheria,mumps, tonsillitis or any such severe inflam-matory illness in very early life is a strong indication for Carcinosin.
. Craving or an aversion or intolerance to one or more of the following—salt, sweet,milk, egg, meat, fat & fruit. There may be craving now and an aversion at another time   in the same patient.
. The patient may be better or worse from sea, air—is an important modality of Carcinosin (Medo., Nat Mur, Sepia, Tuberculinum).
. Great desire to lie on chest or knee—elbow position even in older children.
. Tendency to insomnia in children occurring in early life.
. Tendency to alimentary upsets of one kind or another—say tendency to diarrhoea or constipation or acidosis in childhood but this is not certain as Dr. Foubister said.

 Mind—In mental picture of Carcinosin also we find com-bination of mental symptoms of many medicines like other physical generals. Clerke says, “Carcinosin is useful in Mental cases with a tendency to suicide and a family history of cancer.
 Mental cases with a background of fright, prolonged fear or unhappiness, and also useful in mental troubles which originate from anticipation. Mentally the patient is either very intelligent and artisic with great affection for fine arts, music, drawing
 etc. or very dull, disinterested, idiotic. Backward or mentally defective children. Heis either fastidious (Ars Alb. Nux V. Anac., Graph.) or possessed with filthy habits (Sulph.). The patient is of obstinate nature (Tub., Bov.). He gets pleasure in observing a thunderstrom (Sepia). He is obsessed with a sense of rhythm and is
 consequently fond of dancing (Sepia). Showing spontaneous sympathy to others is one of his main characteristics (Phos.) The child if reprimanded reacts either mentally or physically or through both (Medo.)
 N.B. : Author has found this remedy unsafe even harmful in open cases of cancer but very useful it constitutional disorders like other remedies? (Boericke recommended in open cases of cancer

chapter 68 :CARDUUS MARIANUS

Silybum DR. REIL Compositae

INTRODUCTION

Carduus M. is pre-eminently a liver remedy. It stands next to Chelidonium in our materia medica so far liver complaints are concerned. It is, useful in various kinds of complaints which
are secondary to liver affections.

CLINICAL

Bronchitis. Dropsy. Epistaxis. Fever.Gall stones. Haemorrhoids. Influenza. Jaundice. Liver—affection of. Metrorrhagia, Neuralgia. Rheumatism. Varicose Veins. Spleen—affection of. Hemoptysis. Cholecystitis.
Cholelithiasis. Hepatitis.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION
It has at least three special centres of action through the nervous system.
1) Liver—It acts upon the liver and portal system giving rise to jaundice and bilious disturbances.
2) Bowels—Here it acts as a laxative producing a catarrhal discharge.
3) Kidneys—lIt produces diuresis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Dragging pain in right hypochondrium when lying on left side (Arn., Mag. M., Nat.i)
2) The liver enlargement in the transverse direction (that of Cheli, more vertical.)
3) Sadness, depressed and hypochondriacal with vertigo and dull heavy pain in forehead.
4) Constipation : Stools hard, difficult, knotty, alternates with diarrhoea. Clay coloured bileless or bright yellow.
5) Want of appetite with nausea, retching, vomiting of green acid fluid.
6) Complaints from abuse of alcoholic beverages.
7) Complaints such as dropsy, haemoptysis, spleen affec-tions, influenza etc. when associated with liver derange-ment.
8) Modalities : Agg.—Lying on “left side, beer, eating, motion, pressure, from stooping.

chapter 69 : CAULOPHYLLUM
Tt"Blue Cohosh BURT Berberidaceae

INTRODUCTION

Caulophyllum is known to the common people as Blue Cohosh or Squaw root. Though the proving was
done for a short period with a limited known therapeutic sphere, the drug has attained a position of being one more of what we term as the “LADY'S REMEDY”

CLINICAL
Abortion threatened, Amenorrhoea, Bearing down pains, Dysmenorrhoea, Disorders of Pregnancy, Haemorrhage, Gonorrhoea, Labour, Leucorrhoea, Menstrual disorders, Rheumatism, Uterine affections, etc.

SPHERE OF ACTION
It acts especially upon the female genital organs- uterus and cervix. Joints, especially small joints and stomach are also the seats of action in few cases.

PATHOGENESIS
Caulophllym has mainly pathogenetic changes on uterus and cervix. Its most prominent value seems to lie in its power of causing INTERMITTENT CONTRACTION
OF GRAVID UTERUS Joints, especially small ones are inflamed. Rheumatic and gouty inflammation occur causing pain, soreness and Swelling.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: It is generally suited to women during pregnancy, parturition and lactation, having MOTH SPOTS ON THE FACE AND FOREHEAD AND DROOPING OF EYE LIDS.

Temperament: Nervous temperament.
Diathesis: Rheumatic and gouty.
GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. “Weakness, exhaustion, Want of tone” are the keynotes of this remedy.
. Pains are intemittent, paroxysmal, spasmodic and erratic, changing place every few minutes.
. Spasmodic rigid os, unable to dilate.
. Passive type of haemorrhage is a very striking feature.
. Leucorrhoea in little girls, is successfully dealt with it.
. Habitual abortion from uterine debility can be remarkably controlled by this drug.
. Upper eyelids are heavy; have to be raised up with the fingers (Caust., Gels., Rhus tox., Sepia).
. For all ailments DURING PREGNANCY PARTURITION AND LACTATION, CAULOPHYLLUM IS AN EXCELLENT REMEDY.


PARTICULARS

Labour pain :

Causation: Delayed labour due to spasmodic rigid os.

Character of pain: Needle-like pricking pain in cervix. False labour pain, short, irregular, spasmodic pain, erratic pains, changing places every few minutes. Pains are intermittent, paroxysmal and spasmodic.

During labour: Useless pain in the beginning of labour, with no progress of labour pain.

After panis: After long exhausting labour, there is spasmodic pain across lower abdomen extending to groins.

After labour: Haemorrhage after hasty labour, passive type of haemorrhage, BLOOD OOZES OUT WITH WANT OF TONICITY. There is passive type of lochia which is protracted, oozing out for days from relaxed vessels.
              When the above mentioned symptoms are present, if Caulophyllum is given, it will correct deranged Vitality and produce efficient pains. During last 2 or 3 weeks of pregnancy, if a dose of 30th potency is given daily, it will make, labour easy.

Haemorrhage : Suited to Haemorrhage in case of habitual abortion.

Causation; From uterine debility, 

Character of blood: Passive type of haemorrhage; blood oozes out with want of tonicity.

Pain: There is severe, spasmodic, paroxysmal pain in the abdomen which flies in all directions.Caulophyllum is one of our best remedies to arrest the abortive process.

Leucorrhoea :Usually found in little girls,

Character: Very much acrid and exhausting leucorrhoea. This is due to congestion of uterus andis associated with bearing down pain with moth spots on forehead and ptosis of the upper eye lids.

Rheumatism : It is an important remedy in reheumatism, but it has a special affinity for small joints.

Location: Small joints e.g. in fingers, toes, etc. Character of pain: There is reheumatic affection of fhe neck and swelling of the finger joints. There is severe drawing, tearing pain. Pain is of flying nature, migrates from one place to another. Severe
          drawing pain in writst and fingers. Fingers are very stiff.

General Remedies :

Aggravation: In open air and by coffee.

Amelioration: By emission of flatus.

Relations :

Similar to: Actea race., Belladonna, Lilium tig, Pulsatilla, Secale cor. Labour pain similar to Pulsatilla, but mental conditions are opposite. Similar to Sepia for “Mouth Patches” and reflex symptoms from uterine irregularities.

chapter 70 CAUSTICUM

Tinctura Acris HAHNEMANN Potassium Sine Kali Hydrate

INTRODUCTION
This drug is one of Hahnemann’s flashes of genius; and outcome of the labours of Hahnemann, the Chemist, Physician and the true Healer of rational art. It is a unique remedy and is one of those “without which we cannot do our practice”. Hering’s Guiding Symptoms say
“Whatever diversity of opinion may exist theoretically, Causticum remains stamped by our best practitioners as a polychrest of the highest order”. Nash too says “If Hahnemann had never given to the Homoeopathic school any remedy but Causticum the world would still owe him
everlasting obligation”. Causticum is an indispensable polychrest remedy.

CLINICAL

Bladder affections, Bronchitis, Burns, Chorea, Constipation, Convulsion, Cough, Ear affection, Epilepsy, Eye affection, Facial Paralysis, Fistula, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Heart affection, Fevers, Laryngitis, Leucorrhoea, Locomotor ataxia, Menstrual disorders, Nervous affection, Paralysis, Pregnancy disorders, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Throat
affection, Ulcers, Urinary disorders, Warts, Whooping cough, Abdominal affections, Respiratory affections, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The principal organs affected by this great drug, are medulla oblongata and vagus nerve; larynx,

trachea : urinary bladder and mucous membrane; FLEXOR TENDONS and skin. It is a right sided remedy.

PATHOGENESIS

The general physiological action of this drug is paralysis, slow pulse, low temperature and general paralytic, weakness. PARALYSIS, especially of vocal cord, Paralysis of the urinary bladder leading to retention of urine or inconigence of urine. Contraction of muscles and tendons is a striking characteristic phenomenon of
Causticum. On mucous membranes of different hollow organs, Casusticum produces an irritant action with increased secretions.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Person of hydrogenoidconstitution with shallow complexion, dark hair and rigid muscular fibres. Physically very much weak, emaciated and anaemic. Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.
Miasm: Anti-psoric and anti-sycotic.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS


.Rawness and Soreness all over the body, especially in throat with aphonia.

.Paralysis of single parts, usually right sided, with gradual decrease of muscular power, twitching and jerking of muscles.

. Great sympathy for the suffering of others.

. Skin prone to intertrigo during dentition or convulsion with eruption of teeth.

.Tendency to form warts.

. Children are late in learning to walk due to nervous weakness; unsteady walking and easy falling.

. Great weakness; sinking of strength with trembling and drooping of eye-lids.

. Generally WORSE IN CLEAR FINE WEATHER AND BETTER IN DAMP WET WEATHER (Hepar sulph., Nux vom., Med.).

. Insanity after suppression of skin eruptions.

. Epilepsy is cured by this great remedy when fit occurs during sleep and urine escapes involuntarily.

. Passes stool better when standing.

. Guernsey commends Causticum in the after effects of burns and scalds. Patient says, “I have never been well since that burn”


Mind : Mental ailments are from long lasting grief, sorrow, fear fright and sudde2 emotions. The patient has intense sympathy for the suffering of others. Melancholy mood, very sad, hopeless, weeping mood, excessive anxiety, full of apprehension, and despondency.
         Weakness of memory and absence of mind are very well-marked. Insanity after suppression of skin eruptions.
Ailments from : Long lasting grief, sorrow from loss of sleep, night watching, lead poisoning, from sudden emotions, fear, fright, joy etc. Suppression of skin eruptions, exposure to cold, burns, scalds and ferbrile condition,

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache is caused by exposure of cold, toss of sleep, night watching, and effects of sorrow, grief, fear, fright, joy etc. pemines Bacon 5 Srnoked ment, peer, s oltre things Avion’. Sweete , meak, woter

Location: Vertex.

Sensation: Sensation of empty space between forehead and brain.

Character of pain: Throbbing, stitching pain, with rawness and soreness.

Modalities:

 Aggravation:, From COLD, IN CLEAR FINE WEATHER.

 Amelioration: In open air, INDAMP WET WEATHER.

Concomitants: Vertigo with sensation of falling forwards or sidewise. Intense photophobia with lachrymation and drooping of eyelids.

Gastrointestinal tract :

Stomach : Bitter taste in mouth due to disordered stomach hot burning eructation. Appetite disappears when attempting to eat. There is colicky pain in stomach compelling the patient to bend double.

Stool : Stool may be soft or hard, but of small quantity, tough and covered with mucous, shining like grease expelled with much straining. Stoo! passes better while standing. There is paralysis o rectum and sphincter ani muscles. There is soreness and rawness of rectum with frequent ineffectual desire.
Urine: Urine passes involuntarily when coughing, expelled very lowly, sometimes much straining is required to pass urine Also urine passes involuntarily while        sleeping Loss of sensibility while passing
uririe. There may also be retention of urine after surgical operation or involuntary urinaion after fever due to weakness of sphincter urethrae.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Throat :

Causation: Exposure to draught of cold air.

Character: There is great RAWNESS AND SORENESS in the throat with hoarseness in the morning. Aphonia with pain in chest. Hoarseness of signers. Larynx is sore and pharynx paralysed.
           Cracking in throat when swallowing.

Cough : There is severe cough with RAWNESS AND SORENESS IN THE CHEST. Expectoration is scanty. Sputa cannot be raised and if raised at all, unable to expectorate and therefore,
        must swallow it. Cannot cough deep enough to get relief by raising the sputa.

Modalities; Cough is aggravated on expiration (Aconite) and IN CLEAR FINE WEATHER; cough is relieved by drinking cold water (Cuprum met) and in damp wet weather.

Concomitants: There is shortness of breath; involuntary passage of urine while coughing, with pain in hip, especially left, cannot speak loudly.
Nervous Symptoms :

Paralysis: Causticum is a GREAT PARALYSER, Paralysis is caused by cold air, after typhoid, diphtheria, etc.

Location: Right sided paralysis, which is gradual in onset.

Character: Paralysis of a single part e.g. face, extremities, vocal organs, etc. Ptosis, drooping of upper eyelids, patient cannot keep them open (Caul., Gels., Sepia, Graphites, Rhus. tox.).

Concomitants: Great rawness and soreness in the affected part and rigidity of flexor tendons. For left sided sciatica (Boericke), Causticum is a aiid waa, There is sciatic pain with numbness, heaviness and weakness of limbs.

Rheumatism : Of joints with stiffness and contraction of flexor tendons, shortening of muscles. Aggravation in CLEAR FINE WEATHER. Amelioration IN DAMP WEATHER and by warm air.

Menses : First menstruation at puberty is delayed, late and irregular.

Time: Too earliyor too late i.e. irregular and feeble.

Character of flow: Bright blood, slow, non-coagulable.

Modality: Menses cease at night. Flow ONLY DURING day.

Concomitants: Great rawness and soreness in urethra, Leucorrhoea may also appear, especially at night with great weakness.

Skin:

Bad effects of burns and scalds..

Character of skin: RAWNESS AND SORENESS in affected parts. Subacute and chronic eruptions. soreness in folds of skin, back of ears, between the thighs, etc. Old burns that do not get well. Cicairices

freshen up. Old burns that patient says “HAVE NEVER BEEN WELL SINCE THAT BURN”. Warts anc condylomata alt over the body, especially on the eyelids, face and nose. Large pedunculatec warts, which bleed easily (Nitric acid).

Modality; Aggravation in clear fine weather and relief in damp wet weather.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In CLEAR FINE WEATHER, dry cold wind, while coming form cold air into a warm room.

Amelioration: IN DAMP WET WEATHER, warm air, heat of bed.

Relation :

Complementary to: Carbo veg. Inimical to: Phos. Causticum must not be used before or after Phos. Caustic um antidotes paralysis from lead poisoning (bad effects of holding type in mouth of compositors).

Note : Like Psor, and Sulph. Causticum too should be thought of when the improvement comes t? a standstill.
It is well to begin with low potencies and in frequent doses.


chapter:71 CEANOTHUS AMERICANUS

New Jersey Tea IC. FAHNESTOCK Compositae

CLINICAL,Bronchitis. Diarrhoea. Intermittent fever.Jaundice.

Leukaemia. Spleen affection of, Leucorrhoea.Ceanothus is a spleen remedy par excellence and suited to anaemic patients where liver and spleen are at fault. It is good antidote to malaria. Drs. Burnett, Hale and P.C. Majumder

proved its efficacy in a number of cases of malaria and in other diseases where spleen is affected. Its indications are pain, inflammation,enlargement of spleen with fullness in the left

hypochonodrium, cchilliness ‘and __ shivering principally down’back and dyspnoea and palpitation on exertion. All symptoms are aggravated by motion and lying on left side.

Liver : Pain & fullness in region of liver worse lying on right-side.

Urine: Constant urging to urinate. Urine is green, frothy contains bile, sugar. There may be diarrhoea with bearing down in abdomen & rectum.

N.B. : In Ch. cases of Malaria, Kalazar specially when spleen is enlarged, it is beneficial when given
in low potency.CEDRON Rattlesnake Bean Simanubaceae

CLINICAL

Ciliary neuralgia. Headache. Hysteria. Intermittent fever. Neuralgia. _Neuritis. Toothache.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) The great characteristic of Cedron is a clock like periodicity in the recurrence of the symptoms.

2) Neuralgia—Especially right side of face, head is affected. There is severe pain in eyeball with radiating pains around eye shooting into nose. Periodic supra orbital neuralgia with scalding
   lachrymation.

3) Intermittent fever : Cedron is valuable in intermittent fever especially when there is a clockwise recurrency in successive attacks of fever and chill. Chill : Before chill, there is a great mental excitement and exaltation of vital
                        energy. During Chill : General coldness renewed by every movement as in Nux and Cinchona.Heat stage : Red face in heat stage. Thirst for warm drink is marked.Sweat stage : The dry heat state is soon followed by a state of profuse perspiration.

4) Complaints after coition such as epilepsy. Chorea.

Relations :

In heart disease complicated with haemorrhoids consult collinsonia when Cac. Dig. and other remedies fail. Has cured colic after col. & Nux had failed.

Compare : Aesc. Aloe, Nux. Sulph. we

chapter 72:CHAMOMILLA

Matricaria Charmomilla HAHNEMANN Compositae

INTRODUCTION

Chamomilla is an annual wind plant growing wild in cultivated fields amongst wheat and paddy. But finally it serves the purpose of an excellent remedy for all ailments BROUGHT ON OR AGGRAVATED BY ANGER. Just as the weed grows in a paddy field causing untold miseries, anger and pain to the farmers and grows at the cost of a useful product so also the patient displays similar manifestations and
develops uncivilised habits. But when the whole plant is crushed, mother tincture is prepared and subsequent potencies are succussed, it becomes a wonderful remedy capable of annihilating many diseases, especially of children, when given on the basis of symptom. similarity. It is an “ANGER AND PAIN REMEDY” which causes TURMOIL IN
TEMPERAMENT.

CLINICAL

Acidity, Anger, Asthma, Abdominal affection, Breast affection, Colic, Convulsion, Cough, Dentition, Diarrhoea, Eye affections, Eructation, Fevers, Headache, Labour,” Menstrual disorders, Miscarriage, Mumps, Neuralgia, Pregnancy disorders, Rheumatism,
Toothache, Ulcers, Uterine affection. Whooping cough,-etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on brain, nerves! mind, stomach and intestine.

PATHOGENESIS

Acting primarily on the nervous system, Chamomilla produces irritability of mind and even spasm and convulsion inflammation of the mucous membrane of the stomach and intestine setting in diarrhoea, dysentery etc.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Persons, especially children, with light brown hair. One cheek red and hot, and the other pale and cold.

Temperament: Nervous, IRRITABLE, excitable temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: There is aggravation from heat and open air and relief in warm wet weather.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. An excellent nick name for Chamomilla is “cannot bear it”. Cannot bear himself Cannot bear others, wants everything but when offered hurls them away. Cannot bear pain    Cannot bear anything. Everything is simply intolerable.
2. It is known as the leading “ANGER REMEDY’; ailments are brought on or aggravated by fits of anger.
3. An irritable Chamomilla child is QUIET ONLY WHEN CARRIED.
4. INTOLERABLE PAIN WITH NUMBNESS OF THE AFFECTED PARTS (Platina Aconite.). There is great debility as soon as pain begins. Aggravation form heat.
5. Desires open air yet over-sensitive to it.
6. Sleepy but cannot sleep (Bell, Stram, Opium).
7. Convulsion of children from nursing AFTER A FIT OF ANGER IN MOTHER.
8. One Cheek red and hot, the other pale and cold.
9. Mental calmness coritraindicates Chamomilla (rev—Puls.)
10. Milk runs out in nursing mother.
11. Hot, offensive; greenish diarrhoea during dentition.

12. Mind : Patient is very irritable, fretful, peevish, snappish, wncivil, cannot re’ civil answer, cross, spiteful, impatient, wants this and that but when offered r it            outright (Bry., Cina., Kreosote, Staph). Piteous moaning of a child because cannot get what he wants. Whinning restlessness, QUIET ONLY WHEN CARR
           ANGER causes many disease such as diarrhoea, convulsion, chill, fever, etc. Pa cannot endure any one near him; cannot bear to be spoken to, aversion to tal             answers peevishly and in an uncivil manner.

13. Ailments from : Anger, dentioton, cold, tobacco.

PARTICULARS

Diarrhoea :

Causation: Anger, from cold, tobacco, downward motion, DURING DENTITION diarrhoe childbed.

Character of stool: It is greenish, watery, corroding, like chopped eggs and spinach, Aor. 6% offensive like rotten eggs.

Modalities :

Aggravation: Towards evening, before mid-night, by heat, anger, from eructation. Relief from fasting, in warm wet weather.

Toothache :

Causation: By taking anything warm; on entering a warm room, taking coffee, during menses of pregnancy. Aggravation form heat, evening before mid-night, in open air and in the wind. Relief in wet weather. (Toothache is aggravated from heat in the case of Bryonia and Pulsatilla but these are relieved by cold).

Convulsion : Caused BY ANGER, from downward motion. Convulsion of a child from nursing after a fit of anger in mother. Aggravation by anger, from downward motion and relief from being carried.

Labour pain : Unbearable pain, drives the patient to despair with numbness of the affected part; spasmodic, distressing pain, wants to get away from them, tearing pain down the legs and pressing upwards.

Rheumatic pain :There is violent rheumatic pain driving the patient out of bed at night, compels the patient to walk about, oversensitive to pain. Pain with numbness of the joints. Aggravation from heat and relief in warm
wet weather.

Breast :Nipples are inflamed and are tender to touch. Milk runs out in nursing women. Infant's breasts are tender to touch.
For burning of the sole at night, which the patient puts out of bed, Chamomilla is a good rerpedy. Such burning of soles and feet is more at night. (Puls., Sulph., Medo.).


Chamomilla Baby :

Chamomilla is especially suited to those children who are newly born and DURING dentition. The baby is very hot and highly psoric; has very IRRITABLE TEMPERAMENT, uncivilised, becomes QUIET
ONLY WHEN CARRIED. Mentally the baby is very much irritable, fretful, peevish and snappish, cross, spiteful, uncivil; cannot return a civil answer. A Chamomilla child can be spotted amongst hundreds by
his peculiar mentality.The baby is very much impatient; wants many things, but when offered rejects all of them. Whining restlessness. Piteous moaning of children all the time because the baby cannot have what he wants. All
the mental symptoms are RELIEVED BY CARRYING. Child cannot bear anyone near him and cannot bear to be spoken to also.Such children may also suffer from convulsion, or fever, or diarrhoea, usually caused BY ANGER. The diarrhoea DURING DENTITION is greenish, hot, very offensive like rotten eggs.
Note: Mental calmness contra-indicates Chamomilla (Mental calmness indicates Pulsatilla).

General Modalities :

Aggravation: By heat, anger, evening, before mid-night, in the open air, in the wind and by eructation.

Amelioration: From being carried, fasting, warm wet weather.

Relation :

It Antidotes: Coffnd narcotics such as Opium.

Antidoted by: Aco, Nux, Puls.

chapter:73 CHELIDONIUM MAJUS

Celandine Papaveraceae

INTRODUCTION

The mother tincture is prepared from extracted Juice of Celandine, a perennial plant growing in Germany, France and other adjacent counties. Chelidonium remains just the
right remedy in any and every case where LIVER IS AT FAULT EITHER FUNCUTIONALLY OR ORGANICALLY. It is another medicine which establishes the doctrine of signature i.e. the yellow colouration of its juice corresponds to the yellowishness of skin, conjunctiva, etc. in jaundice. The author has used this medicine with great success in physiological doses in thousands of cases of liver disorders resulting in Jaundice, Indigestion, Flatulence,
Constipation, Cholecystitis, Cholelithiasis, etc. In complaints resulting from taking adulterated foodstuff.

CLINICAL

Chest affection. Constipation, Cough, Dyspepsia, Gall-stone, Gonorrhoea, Haemoptysis, Jaundice, Liver affection, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Kidney affection, Whooping-cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main seat of action of the remedy centres on the hepato-biliary system—liver. gall bladder, bile duct etc. Skin and stomach are also reflexly affected. In few cases, lungs are not spared with the affection of bronchi and mucous membrane. Spleen, and kidney
are also not beyond the reach of this medicine. IT IS A RIGHT SIDED DRUG.

PATHOGENESIS

On liver, it produces congestion, inflammation and sometimes degeneration. As 2 result of this there is enlargement of the organ with final consequential shrinkage and cirrhosis. Right lung, when affected, producees symptoms of pneumonia with jaundiced
skin and mucous membrane.

CONSTITUTION

It is adapted to persons of light complexion, blonde, thin and irritable, having hepatic, gastric and abdominal complaints at any stage, sex and temperament. 


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Affects RIGHT SIDE MORE e.g. right eye, right lung, right hypochondrium- and abdomen, right hip and leg. Chelidonium Majus . aa

2. Constant pain under the lower and inner angle of Peisht seapula. (Kali c., Merc.) due to gallstone or liver complaints, etc.

3. Desire for VERY HOT DRINKS, unless it is almost boiling. Stomach wilt not retain or tolerate it.

4. Yellow, grey colour of the whole skin and mucous membrane.

5. For bilious complications during gestation, Chelidonium is infallible.

6. Thick, yellow coated tongue with imprint of teeth.

7. All troubles are better after dinner (Anac., Iod,).

8. Ailments from : Change of weather.

PARTICULARS

Mouth :

Bitter taste in mouth.

Tongue :

Coated thickly yellow, with red edges, showing imprint of teeth (Podo., Merc sol., Rhus tox.).

Abdomen :
Great distension of abdomen with gas. PAIN through stomach to back and right shoulder blade. Gastralgia, bitter taste in mouth with nausea and vomiting. Eating relieves temporarily. WANTS
HOT FOOD AND DRINKS.

Constipation :

Stool hard, round like a ball, like sheep’s dung (Plumbum, Opium). Bright yellow, clay coloured stool, with burning and itching in anus. There is alternate diarrhoea and constipation.


Diarrhoea :

Causation: Change of weather.

Time: At night (Pulsitilla, China—Diarrhoea during day, Petroleum).

Character of stool: Involuntary, bright, yellowish, brown or white, slimy.

Concomitants: There is alternate diarrhoea and constipation.


Liver :

Chelidonium is indicated in hepatic diseases, such as jaundice, when there is CONSTANT PAIN UNDER THE LOWER and INNER ANGLE OF RIGHT SCAPULA. Yellow grey colour of the whole skin. Wilted skin of the palms and hands. Face, forehead, nose and cheeks are remarkably yellow. There is sluggish liver with great fermentation and accumulation of gas in the abdomen. There is nausea and

vomiting with bitter taste in mouth. The tongue is large and flabby, yellow, showing imprint of teeth. The patient wants very hot food and drink.

Modalities: There is aggravation from motion and touch. Amelioration from pressure. In hepatic affection it differs from BRYONIA and LYCO. Both Bryonia and Chelidonium have sharp,

stitching pain under the right shoulder blade; both have bitter taste in mouth, and yellow tongue. But Bryonia differs in its stool which is HARD, DRY AND BROWN, while the stool of Chelidonium is

clay coloured and yellow. In addition, aggravation from slightest motion is a very prominent symptom of Bryonia, whereas it is not so well-marked in Chelidonium. Aggravation from warm drink and food is

found in Bryonia, but opposite condition is present in Chelidonium. Lycopodium differs from Chelidonium as follows : In chronic disease, Lyco is indicated whereas

Chelidonium is called for in acute conditions. Aggravation FORM 4-8P.M, is very characteristic of Lyco,but not so in Chelidonium. Lyco, also differs from Chelidonium especially ja the rumbling. of flatus, In Lyco., taste is sour whereas bitter in Chelidonium. The pains of Lyco.,.are dull aching while the pains

of Chelidonium are sharp and lancinating.

Gall-Stone Colic :

Gall-stone colic with PAIN UNDER THE RIGHT SCAPULA with nausea and bilious vomiting. There is sharp, lancinating pain in the gall-bladder region. There is yellowish grey colour of the skin, face, forehead, nose, etc.

The tongue is thick, yellow Coated, showing imprint of teeth.Patient wants very hot drinks.

Modalities:
 
Aggravation: From touch and motion.

Better by: Pressure.

Pneumonia : For Pneumonia associated with liver affections, Chelidonium is a good medicine.

Location: Lower lobe of right lung is generally affected.

Sensation: Constriction of chest.

Character of pain: Dysponea, very quick and sharp inspiration; pain on inspiration; PAIN IN THE RIGHT SIDE OF CHEST AND SHOULDER.

Character of cough: There is spasmodic cough, small lumps of mucous fly from mouth wher

coughing (Kali carb., Psorinum).

Tongue: Thick yellow coating on tongue with imprint of teeth.

Modalities:
 Aggravation: On right side, from motion and touch.

 Amelioration: From pressure.

Concomitants: Patient wants very hot drinks. There is yellow skia yellowish urine, fan like motio" of alae nasi.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Right side, motion, touch and change of weather.

Amelioration : After dinner, form pressure.

Relations :
Sulphur often completes its work.

Complementary: Lyco., Bry.

Antidoted by: Acon., Camphor, Coffee. It Antidotes: Bryonia.

chapter:74 CHININUM ARSENICOSUM
Arsenite of Quinine DR. WILLIAM BIGLER

INTRODUCTION

The symptoms of general weariness and prostration produced by the drug have been utilised in prescribing it homoeopathically as a general tonic, often with very marked beneficial and prompt effect. In diphtheria specially prolonged cases, malaria, neuralgia etc. it has been found curative. It is also useful in asthmatic attacks which recur periodically, with great prostration.

CLINICAL
Asthma, Diarrhoea, Gastralgia. Hectic fever.Neuralgia. Rheumatism.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Neuralgia : The periodicity is itensified (Cedron, Kali Bich.) An irritable mood precedes the headache, which is aggravated by mental and bodily exercise.

2) Gastralgia : Pressure in solar, plexus with tender spine just at back of it.Alteration of hyperacidity and decrease of acid, nausea and vomiting a.re followed by sleep.

3) Diarrhoea : Egg produces diarrhoea.

4) Gastralgia from coarse food of ill-baked bread. Indiges-tion from unripe fruits. Colic from incarcerated flatus (Raphanus).

5) Chronic rheumatism of joints without swelling.

6) Intermittent fever : With great prostration & periodicity. Chill stage predominates with little thirst and continuous almost convulsive yawning.



CHOLESTERINUM
Cholesterine

(The proximate principle. Furnished by the epithelium lining of gall bladder and the larger ducts) Clinical: Gallstones, Jaundice, Liver- cancer of; diseases of. Vitreous, opacities of, glass like.

1) Cholesterinum is a useful remedy for obstinate hepatic engorgements, for cancer of the liver; for obstinate gallstones, obstinate jaundice.

2) Vitreous opacities.

3) In gallstones, after failure with Nux, Cinchona, Carduus, Podophyllum and other apparently well selected remedies.

4) Yingling reports some cures of gallstone colic & Other diseases of liver.

5) Ameke claimed to have derived great advantage from its use incases diagnosed as cancer of the liver or in such obstinate engorgements that malignancy was suspected.

6) Burnett claims to have twice cured cancer of the liver with it, and “in hepatic engorgements that by reason of their intractable and slow yielding to well selected remedies make one think interrogationally of Cancer”.


chapter 75 CICUTA VIROSA

Water Hemlock HAHNEMANN Umbelliferae I

INTRODUCTION

Cicuta virosa can be nick-named as ‘CONVULSION’. It is very valuable remedy for violent convulsion from any cause with loss of consciousness. This drug has been derived from vegetable kingdom. The whole plant is very poisonous and is fatal to animals. The mother tincture is prepared from fresh root of the plant. When the poisonous property is transformed into dynamic power after potentisation, it serves as an excellent remedy for various nervous disorders manifested in the form of epilepsy, chorea,spasm, hysteria, convulsion, etc.

CLINICAL

Convulsion, Epilepsy, Hysteria, Meningitis, Numbness, Paralysis, Skin affection, Tetanus, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The cheif centres of action of this drug are cerebro-spinal nervous system, especially medula oblongata, gastro-intestinal tract and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes irritation of the cerebro-spinal nervous system producing local and generalised spasm and paralysis, tetanus, epileptic, and epileptiform convulsions,trismus and tonic and clonic spasm in general.

CONSTITUTION

There is no particular constitution or look of the patient as such.

Temperament: Nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. According to Clarke, the two grand key-note symptoms of Cicuta virosa are:

(a) Twitching and spasmodic jerks.

(b) Bending of the head backwards or opisthotonos.

2.  Whatever be the nervous manifestation, whether it gets the name of epilepsy, chorea, hysteria, or eclampsia, etc., from any cause such as epileptic, hysterical,         gastric, worms, suppressed eruption, etc., it matters little, the first drug which we
    can think of is Cicuta virosa, provided in most cases the ATTACK IS VERY VIOLENT (usually) accompanied by loss of consciousness and renewed by slightest touch, noise        odour, etc. and are relieved by rest and in a dark room 
3. During convulsive attack, there is FRIGHTFUL DISTORTION of the face, limbs oyof the whole body.

4, Puerperal convulsion with frequent suspension of breath.

5. In children during dentition or from worms, there is spasm or convulsion of clonicor tonic type.

6. Abnormal appetite and craving for indigestible things such as chalk, coal charcoal,etc. (Alumina, Cina, Nit. Acid, Cale. carb.).

7. Eczema with no itching. The exudation from eczema forms into a hard lemon-coloured crust.

8. Brain disease from suppressed eruption.

9. When reading, the letters seem to turn, go up and down or disappear completely.

10. Ailments from : Nervous irritation, worms, suppressed eruption, shock and injury.

PARTICULARS

Convulsion :
Cicuta virosa is especially suited to women who are subject to epileptic or choreic convulsion or spasm of children during dentition period or from worms. During convulsion, the attack is VIOLENT. There is very FRIGHTFUL DISTORTION of face, limbs or of the whole body. The patient loses consciousness. Opisthotonos is a general feature (Natrum sulph..
Veratrurh vir.). The epileptic attack is renewed from SLIGHTEST TOUCH, NOISE OR JAR AND MOTION.Epilepsy is associated with swelling of stomach as from violent spasm of diaphragm. The patient
screams. The face may be red or bluish. Consciousness is lost, jaws are locked with distortion of limbs and face, BEYOND RECOGNITON. The attack is frequently at night; recurring first at short intervals and
then at long intervals. ,Guermsey says, “think of this remedy for convulsion which are excessively violent— whether epileptic, cataleptic clonic or tonic eclampsia.” According to Nash, .it it another remedy characterised by its . excessively VIOLENT convulsions. The body is drawn into all sorts of odd shapes and violent contortions, but one of the most invariable
symptoms is bending of head, neck and spine backwards (opisthotonos). It is on this account that it was tried for cerebro-spinal meningitis. Nash also thinks that it is as near a specific for this disease as there
can be.Kent says, that this remedy is of most extreme interest because of its convulsive tendency. It puts the whole nervous system into such a state of increased irritability that pressure on a part causes convulsion. The convulsion extends from centre to periphery. The convulsion spreads from above
downwards and in this it is the opposite of Cuprum. Between the interim period of convulsions the patient is mild, gentle, placid and yielding, (rev. of Nux yomica. In Nux yomica, between the convulsions too the patient is very irritable.) During puerperium, the lady gets convulsions with frequent suspension of breathing for a few
moments seems as if dead. The upper part of the body is mostly affected.The child gets spasm and convulsion during dentition or from worms. The baby grinds his teeth and orgums, compresses the jaws as in lock-jaw. Renewed by slightest touch, noise and light.Brain disease from suppressed eruption is also wonderfully cured by this remedy.The troubles are aggravated from slightest touch, noise, jar and motion and tobacco smoke, and
relieved by rest and in a dark room.

Skin :

Cicuta virosa is a marvellous remedy for skin affections of a peculiar character as follows:-

Eczema with NO ITCHING. There is exudation from the eczema which forms into a hard, lemon-coloured crust.

The pustules run together and form a thick yellow scab, especially on head and face and other parts of the body, sycosis menti (Mandibular region).

For Barber’s itch or troubles after shaving, Cicuta virosa is an excellent remedy.

Patients who suffer from violent shock through head, stomach, arms, legs, and jerking of the parts,with head hot may also have to take the help of this remedy for relief.

Furthermore, for injurious chronic effect from concussion of the brain and spine which results in spasm, trismus and tetanus, from getting splinters into flesh, Cicuta virosa is the remedy generally
indicated (Hyper.).

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From tobacco smoke (Ign.) touch, odour, jar, motion and noise.

Amelioration: By rest and in a dark room.

Relation :

Compare: Hydr. ac., Hyper., Nux vom. and Strych. It is antidoted by: Arnica and Opium.


chapter:76 CINA


Worm Seed HAHNEMANN Compositae

INTRODUCTION

Cina, well known as the “WORM REMEDY”, especially for children.is one of! the monumental treasures discovered by Hahnemann. Although Homoeopathy does not believe in specificity, here is a drug which is very near to the specific remedy for worm affection in children. With the inclusion of this remedy in our Materia Medica we have an infallible and permanent solution for
ailments brought on by worm.

CLINICAL

Ascaris lumbricoid, Abdomen, Anaemia, Anus irritation, Chorea, Colic, Convulsion, Cough, Dentitional troubles, Diarrhoea, Enuresis, Fever, Twitching, Urine milky, Worm irritation, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Cina acts on mind, gastro-intestinal tract, urinary bladder and nerves.

PATHOGENESIS

Due to its action on gastro-intestinal tract, it causes irritation and inflammation, producing various reflex symptoms like convulsion, cough, etc.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Especially suited to persons or children with dark hair and complexion, pale face, sickly body, whitish or bluisih appearance around the mouth, with dark ring around the eyes. One cheek red and the other pale.

Temperament: Irritable temperament. Relation with heat and cold: May be any.

Miasm: Latent Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

Worm troubles : Especially due to Ascaris lumbricoid.

1. Cina is pre-eminently a WORM remedy as it causes all the symptoms which characterise helminthiasis, mental, bodily and nervous, such as grinding of teeth, constant   digging and boring of nose, screaming during sleep, indigestion, naues and or vomiting, nocturnal enuresis, pain in abdomen and mental irritability extending even to    convulsions.

2. A marked feature running through Cina is TOUCHINESS mentally and physically. Mental touchiness is manifested by irritability, Whereas physical touchiness is marked by sensitiveness in skin of scalp, hands, feet, etc.

3. Canine hunger; but it has alternating canine hunger and complete loss of appetite.

4. Complaints which are concomitant to yawning, coming on whenever one yawns (Guernsey).

5. Intense circumscribed redness of cheek (Nash).

6. Aphonia from exposure to cold air when Acon., Spongia and Phos., have failed. 

7. Disire for sweets and various indigestible things.

8. Patient sleeps in knee elbow position.

9. Even carrying does not give relief to the patient.(Carrying gives relief, Chamomilla).

10. Clean tongue (Ipecac., Digit.).

11. Mind : Mentally the patient is highly irritable, peevish, very cross and ill-humoured. Does not want to be touched or looked at, cannot bear anyone to come near him.     Wants various things, but. when offered flatly refuses (Bryonia,
    Chamomilla, Kreosote, Staph.).

12. Ailments from : Worms, specially round worms, taking sweets, over eating, or eating indigestible things e.g. coal, charcoal, chalk, stone chips, etc.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Headache alternating with pain in abdomen. Worse by study or meditation and relieved by stooping.

Nose. Constant boring and digging at the nose, always pick up the nose. Itching and rubbing of nose,due to worm trouble.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Tongue : Cina patient generally has clean tongue, with white papillae raised on red edges.

Stomach : Canine hunger. Hungry soon after a full meal. There is great desire for sweets and different, indigestible things. There may also be spasmodic cramping pain in the stomach.

All gastro-intestinal symptoms are aggravated from taking sweets. With the above-mentioned symptoms, there may be diarrhoea and vomiting with clean tongue.

In diarrhoea, the colour of the stool is white, thin and watery with-undigested food particles in it. Concomitant symptoms are: Boring of nose, grinding of teeth, irritability of mind, with nocturnal
enuresis.

Abdomen : Distended and hard from worm troubles. Cina patient wants to lie on abdomen to get relief. There may be crampy spasmodic pain in’abdomen with gnawing sensation.

Urine : Patient, usually a child, passes turbid urine which turns MILKY and semi-solid after sometime. White and turbid urine, passing involuntarily. In children, usually suffering fronji worms there
may be nocturnal enuresis.

cough : Consequent upon worm infestation, there is dry cough with sneezing, spasmodic gagging in the morning. Periodic return of cough in every spring coming in epidemic form. Child is afraid to speak
        
or move because it causes return of a paroxysm of cough. Cough is aggravated from movement and speaking (Bry). Cina can also be thought of in the case of pertusis (whooping cough) in children after Drosera hits relieved some of the symptoms. Furthermore,
        
for children, Cina is to be frequently used as an epidemic remedy for whooping cough, while adults require other drugs. Cina is also capable of curing aphonia from exposure when Aconite, Spongia and Phosphorus have failed.

Skin : There is great sensitiveness of touch. Scalp is very sensitive (o touch, particularly during typhoid fever.

Cina Baby : Cina is particularly adapted to the babies who suffer from worms. The baby is having HIGHLY IRRITABLE TEMPERAMENT, All the complaints are caused due to WORM IRRITATION especially. Ascaris lumbricoides, due to which the baby always grinds the teeth an bores the nose or rubs ‘the nose on the pillow or against the shoulder of the nurse.Baby looks very pale with dark hair and complexion. There is whitish, bluish appearance around the mouth with dark ring around the eyes. Sickly I baby with one cheek red and the other pale (One cheek red and hot, the other pale and cold—Cham.).The baby starts screaming during sleep and weeps pitifully after waking up. While sleeping, the ba grinds the teeth due to worrr irritation and bores trie nose. Passes urine while sleeping. Mentally the baby is highly irritable, peevish, cross and ill-humoured; does not want to be touched o looked at; cannot bear to have any one near him; wants many things but refuses everything when offered. (Cham., Bry., Staph., Kreosote). Even carrying does not give relief (Carrying gives relief—Cham.)
The baby is VERY HUNGRY; wants to eat all the time, very hungry soon after a full meal.Baby wants to lie on abdomen while sleeping. There is great desire for sweets and indigestible things and aversion to mother’s milk. Due to irritation from the worms, the child may often get an attack of convulsion, especially during sleep. In addition, there may be crampy and spasmodic pain in abdomen Such child usually suffers from diarrhoea, caused by taking sweets; the character of stool being watery, thin, white containing undigested food particles with clean tongue. Such children may also have nocturnal enuresis due to worm irritation; turbid when passing, but furnmilky after sometime.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: After taking sweets, after anger, over-eating.

Amelioration: By lying on the abdomen,

Relations :

Compare: With Antim. crud,, Antim, tart., Bryonia, Chamomilla, Kreosote, Silicea, Staphisagria in irritability of children. Cina is frequently to be thought of for children as an epidemic remedy, when adults require other drugs.Santonine sometimes cures worm affections when Cina seems indicated, but fails.


chapter:77 CINCHONA OFFICINALIS (CHINA)
Peruvian Bark HAHNEMANN Rubiaceae China

INTRODUCTION

When we think about Cinchona, we are unknowingly taken to 1790 in the study room of Hahnemann because it was Cinchona bark which revealed to him the unique system of treatment, “Homoeopathy”. After passing the M.D., the then highest examination in Allopathy and practising it for about 10 years, Hahnemann became completely disappointed and disgusted with the crude, inhuman,torturing, troublesome and harmful system of allopathic treatment. He was master of many languages. Therefore, he decided to earn his livelihood by the most innocent, yet useful profession of translating various books into different languages. While doing so, he came across the fact that Cinchona bark has the power of producing malaria-like symptoms in healthy human beings, and this led him to conclude that if it has got the power to produce malaria-like symptoms in the healthy human beings, theri it is also capable of curing the natural disease manifesting symptoms similar to that of malaria in people naturally sick. With this idea in view, he himself took a little quantity of the juice expressed from the Cinchona bark and he was soon sick with symptoms similar to malaria. He tried the experiment on his family members and friends with the same results. This was the beginning of the historic invention of “HOMOEOPATHY”. THUS
CINCHONA TO HAHNEMANN WAS, WHAT FALLING APPLE WAS TO Newton.Following this pleasant experience and new idea, Hahnemann proved and established many remedies on the basis of “SIMILIA SIMILIBUS CURANTUR”. He also treated with great success many diseases t with the remedies he proved arid established,of which the first and foremost was Cinchona.

CLINICAL

Anaemia, Abdominal disorders, Bilious attack, Catarrhal affection, Constipation, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Dyspepsia, Deafness, Gall-stone colic, Haemorrhage, Headache, Intermittent fever, Jaundice, Labour, Liver complaints, Pain, Menstrual troubles, Rheumatism, Respiratory troubles, Spleen affection, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

China predominantly acts on blood, cardiovascular system, gastro-intestinal tract, liver, spleen, respiratory organs, nervous system, brain and mind.
PATHOGENESIS

It acts upon the nervous system, producing a condition of qeneral depression and exhaustion and it inhibits enzyme action, thus retarding tissue metabolism. It also destroys the oxygenating power of the blood; alters the quantity and quality of blood; initiates haemorrhage; affects the vegetative system involving liver and spleen, producin congestion, hyperaemia and jaundice. Above all, it has got the power to produce fever of varying types, especially intermittent type.

CONSTITUTION

To put in one word the constitution of China is “PUMPED OUT” (according to Dr. P.C. Paul of Calcutta) or “BROKEN DOWN’ constitution from exhausting discharges and loss of vital fluids and abuse of quinine.
Make-up of the body: Once robust, strong and healthy stout, swarthy person who has become weak, debilitated and exhausted by loss of vital fluids such as haemorrhage, diarrhoea, suppuration, lactation, etc.

Termparament: Nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Haemorrhagic diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Great tendency to PERIODICITY is well-marked throughout the remedy.

2. Profound debility from exhausting discharges and loss of vital fluids and haemorrhage, etc. Great debility, trembling, “ aversion to exercise and very sensitive to touch to pain, to draught of air.

3. Excessiue irritability and sensitiveness of the whole nervous system is one of the prominent features of China.

4. Dropsy, either generalised or localised, from anaemia, loss of vital, fluid or haemorrhage is one of the criteria for China.

5. Pains are aggravated by slightest touch, but are RELIEVED BY HARD PRESSURE.Shaking chill all over the body is well-marked.

6. Debilitating sweat with noctural diarrhoeas is a peculiar characteristic of China.

7. Disposition to haemorrhage from every orifice of the body.

8. Painless nocturnal diarrhoea is found only in China.

9. Malaria cachexia, chronic fever with liver and spleen complaints.

10. After climacteric, there is PROFUSE HAEMORRHAGE, acute diseases often result
    in dropsy, with ringing and buzzing sound in ears.

11. Desire for sour things, sour fruit, dainties, wine, cold things, coffnd highly seasoned food. Aversion to bread, meat, fatty things, warm food and exercise. Corgan

12. Mind : APATHETIC, INDIFFERENT, taciturn, gloomy, ill-humoured and despondent. Has no desire to live, but lacks courage to commit sucide. Increased irritability of the        nerves. Dislike of bodily and mental work. Discontended; he thinks himself unfortunate and fancies he is opposed and tormented by every body. He is lost in
      thoughts. Sudden crying and tossing about in despair. Ideas crowded in mind preventing sleep. Aversion to exercise. Dread of.dogs and other animals, especially at       night. Disposed to be quarrelsome and inclined to be angry.

13. Ailments form : Exhausting discharges or LOSS OF VITAL FLUIDS SUCH AS HAEMORRHAGE, EXCESSIVE LACTATION, DIARRHOEA, SUPPURATION, etc. Bad effects from tea drinking or                    abuse of Chamomilla, quinine; from meConfinement : Restraint indoors due to disease or due to childbirth.
Constipation: Difficult defecation.

Corpulent: Bulky state.

Corrosive : Excoriating.

Crib: High sided bed for baby.

Cri encephalique: Brain cry, Sudden shrill cry as in meningitis and encephalitis.
Croup: Hard dry cough usually occurring in paroxysms.

Crumbling: Breaking into small pieces.

Cutaneous: Relating to skin.

Cyanosis: Blueness of skin usually due to deoxygenated discoloration.

Cyst:
1. Abnormal sac containing gas, fluid of a semi-solid matter.

2. The bladder.
D

Dandruff: Flakes of dead.skin formed on the scalp or scaly material shed from the scalp.

Death rattle : Respiratory rattling of mucus in throat of a dying person due to loss of cough
reflex.

Debauch : To go astray morally, corrupt.


Glossary ” 743

Decubitus :
1. The position of the patient in bed;
2. Bed sore.

Delirium: A confused and excited state of organic orgin marked by incoherence, illusions and
hallucination.

Delirium tremens: A form of acute insanity due to alcoholic poisoning marked by sweating,
restlessness, anxiety, precordial distress, mental congestion and hallucination.

Delusion: False belif or wrong judgment.

Desire: Liking for a thing.

Despondency: Loss of courage or hope; dejection.

Diathesis : An unusual constitutional susceptibility or predisposition to a particular disease.
d. rheumatic: Predisposition to rheumatism.
d. haemorrhagic : Predisposition to haemorrhage.

d, tubercular : Predisposition to tuberculosis.
d. scrofulous : Predisposition to glandular swellings especially in the neck.

Doctrine of signature : Belief that there were specific therapeutic essences, a cure for every
disease, to be found in plants, minerals or chemicals.

Diplopia: Double vision

Diurnal: Occurring during day.

Distortion: The State of being pushed out of normal shape or position.
Dysmenorrhoea: Menstruation so painful as to disable the lady from normal work.
Dyspepsia: Indigestion or upset stomach.

Dyspnoea: Difficult respiration.

Dyscrasia: Morbid state resulting from presence of toxic matter in blood.

Ecchymosis: Purplish patch due to extravasation of blood into the skin; black and blue spot.

Emaciation: Extreme loss of flesh.

Emphysema: Permanent dilation of pulmonary air vesicle.

Entreating: Appealing earnestly.

Enuresis: Incontinence of urine.

Epilepsy: A chronic nervous disorder with attacks of unconsciousness or convulsion or both.
Epistaxis: Nose bleed.

Erythism: Abnormal state of excitement or irritation either general or local.


744 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

——————————— en

Erethema: Redness of skin or superficial bluish.

Erysipelas: Acute inflammatory diseases with eruptions limited to skin and sharply defined.
Eructation: Belching.

Exaggeration: Overstatement.

Examination funk: A low depressd mood occurring before an examination.

Exanthemata: Skin eruption or rash occurring incertain infectious diseases like measles,
smallpox, etc.

Exanthema: Singular of exanthemata.

Exhalation: To breathe out.

Extremes of life: Childhood and old age.

Extravasation: Escape of blood or lymph from a vessel to other tissues.
Excrescence: Any outgrowth from surface.

Exostosis : Abnormal outgrowth of bone.

Exudation: Oozing out or discharge.

F

Fag : To work hard and become very tired as a result.
Fastidious : Choosy, not easy to please, very critical and discriminating.

Fatty degeneration : Formation of globules of fat in the cytoplasm from the cell, not
transported from other sites.

Felon : Whitlow or panaritium.
Fibrinous : Composed of fibrin, the clotting material.

Fistula : Pathologic sinus or abnormal passage from an abscess or from a hollow organ to
surface or from one organ to another.

Flatulence : Excessive accumulation of gas in stomach and intestine.
Foetid : Foul smelling.
Frigidity : Sexual coldness.

Funk : A low depressed mood appearing before an examination.

Gastritis: Inflammation of the gaster e.g. stomach.

Glairy mucus: Shining or glossy mucus.


Glossary 745

Gleet: Slight chronic discharge of thin muco-pus from urethra following gonorrhoea.
Globus hystericus: Sensation as if a ball in throat occurring in emotional attacks.
Gold headed cane patient: Fastidious person.

Gloomy: Very sad or dejected, hopeless and melancholic.

Glossary: A partial dictionary giving meaning of technical terms.

Griping: To cause sharp pain in the bowels, very distressing.

Grumous: Scrofulous.

Hallucination: False Imaginations.

Haematemesis: Vomiting of blood.

Haematuria: Presence of blood in urine.

Hemiopia: Loss of vision for one half of the visual field.

Haemoptysis: Spitting of blood.

Haemorrhoids: Piles, Varicose condition of the external haemorrhoidal veins causing
painful condition of anus.

Heart burn: Pyrosis or water brash.

Helminthiasis: Condition of having intestinal vermiform parasites.

Hemicrania: Migraine, Hemicephalia.

Herpes : A spreading eruption of deep seated vesicles on an erethematous base-h. simplex
and h. zoster.

Hernia: Protrusion of a part or an organ or other structure through wall of the cavity
normally containing it.

Hippocratic face: Face of a dying man as described by Hippocratis marked by emaciated
nose, etc.

Hilarity: Excessive mirth.

Headstrong: Determined not to follow order, advice, etc. but to do as he pleases.

Home-sickness: Longing for home and sickness for being away from home and family.

Hour glass contraction: Constriction in the middle Portion of a hollow organ, such as,
stomach or gravid uterus.

Hydrocele: Collection of serous fluid in a sacculated cavity, especially in tunica vaginalis of
testis.

Hydrocephalus: Excessive accumulation of fluid in the cerebral ventricles dilating these
cavities, thinning the brain, and causing separation of cranial bone.

Hydrophobia: Rabies in men. fear of water due to it.


746 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

ee SSSSSFFFe_._OOYy”

Hygroma: Cystic swelling containing serous fluid,, such as, cysitc lymphangioma,
hhousemaid’s knee, etc.

Hyperaemia: Presence of an increased amount of blood in a part; congestion.
Hyperemesis : Excessive vomiting.

Hypochondriace: Imagines that he suffers from a disease.

eo

Ichorous: A thin watery discharge from an ulcer or an unhealthy wound.

Icterus: Jaundice.

Illusion: A false perception; the mistaking of something for what it is not.
Incarcerated: Confined; imprisoned, e.g. an irreducible hernia.
Incipient: Just beginning to exist or to come to notice.

Indignation : Anger.

Indolent : Inactive; sluggish.

Inebriety: Drunkenness; intoxication.

Inimical : Unfavourable, unfriendly, harmful.

Irresolute: Wavering in decision, purpose or opinion; indecisive.
Ischuria : Retention or suppression of urine.

Intertrigo: Dermatitis occurring between two folds of the skin, such as, between the buttock
and thighs.

Intussusception : Invagination; the folding of one segment of the
intestine within another.
Inverted saucer : A turned up plate.

Involution: Return of an organ to its normal size after distension, as of the uterus after
childbirth.

Jovial : Gay; Joyful; Jolly.

Keloid: A new growth or tumour or skin consisting of whitish ridges, nodules and plaques of
dense tissue.

Keratitis : Inflammation of cornea.

Kerato-iritis : Inflammation of cornea and iris.

Laceration : A wound produced by tearing of skins.

Lachrymation : Shedding of tears.

Lactation: (1) Secretion of milk.
(2) Period of secretion of milk.

Laparotomy : Surgical incision
(1) through abdominal wall.
(2) into the loin.
Lame: Stiff and very painful.
Lardaceous : Resembling lard.
Lassitude : A state or feeling of being tired.
Linen: The underpart of dress.
Lesion: Any hurt, wound or local degeneration.
Let’s up with a snap : Stops suddenly.

Leucoderma: An acquired condition with localised loss of pigmentation of the skin resulting
in abnormal whiteness.

Leucorrhoea: A whitish discharge from the vagina and uterine cavity.
Lienteria : Diarrhoea with passage of undigested food.

Linear spots : Discolouration of skin following dyspepsia.

Lock jaw: Inability to open the jaws as seen in tetanus.

Longing for : A strong desire for.

Locomotor ataxia : Total or partial inability, to co-ordinate voluntary bodily movements.
Loquacity : Excessive talkativeness.

Marrow: The soft, fatty substance filling up the medullary cavities and cancellous
extremities of the long bones.
Magnetized : To be rubbed.
Mania: (1) wild or violent mental disorder.
(2) An excessive craze for something.
a. Nymphomania : Extreme sexual desire in women.
b. Religios mania: Mania with abnormal religious impulses.
c. Peurperal maina: Mania which follows childbirth.
d. Satyriasis : Extreme sexual desire in men.
e. Lascivious mania : Mania characterised by expression of lust.

Marasmus : Extreme emaciation cV general atrophy occurring especially in young children
not due to any specific or obvious casuse, such as T.B.

Matrix : The formative portion of a nail or tooth.

Meningitis: Inflammation of the covering membranes of the brain and spinal cord.
Menorrhagia: Excessively profuse or prolonged menstruation.

Mesmerism : To be hypnotised.

Metastasis: The shifting of a disease or its local manitestation from the part of the body to
another as seen in mumps when parotid gtena heals, testes becomes affected.

Metrorrhagia : Irregular, acyclic bleeding from uterus, particularly between periods.

Miasm: An inborn or acquired state, peculiar to an individual which predisposes him to a
disease, group of diseases or mental condition.

Micturition: Urination.
Milestones of life : Significant or importants event in the career of a person.

Miller’s asthma : Catarrhal inflammation of the larynx in children, accompanied by, night
attacks of spasmodic closure of the glottis, causing inspiratory stridor.

Mole : Pigmented naevus. A congenital neoplasm.

Mortification: Shame, humiliation, chagrin, etc. something causing shame.

Moth spot : Discolouration of skin due to hepatic or uterine cause or exposure to sun’s heat.
Mouldy : Stale musty smell.

Mucous membrane : The mucous coat in the internal parts of the body such as mouth,
intestine, urethra, anus, vagina, etc.

Murmur: A soft sound, like that made by a somewhat forcible expiration with the mouth
open, heard on auscultation of the heart, lungs’ or blood vessels. Also used for a variety of
other than soft sounds which may be loud, harsh or frictional.

Systolic m. One heard during systole.
Diastolic m. One heard during diastole.

Musty: Having a stale or mouldy smell as in a closed room.

Naevus: Congenital lesion or discoloured patch of the skin.
Necrosis: Death of a cell as the result of diease or injury.

Narcotic : Producing stupor or sleep.

Neuralgia : Pain in a nerve.

Nodosity : A swelling, node or protuberance.

Noxious effluvia : Hurtful to health or injurious smell.
Numbness : Deprived of the power of feeling, insensible.

Nystagmus : Continuous rolling movement of eyeballs.

Obesity: An abnormal increase of fat in the subcutaneous connective tissues. Fatness,
corpulence.

Oedema : Dropsy, Pathological accumulation of fluid in tissue spaces.

Old toper : A person long used to regular drinking.

Onanism : Masturbation.

Oozing : Flowing or leaking outslowly.

Opthalmia neonatorum : Purulent severe inflammation of eyes of the new born.
Opisthotonos: Tetanic spasm which flexes the head and feet backward.
Orchitis : Inflammation of the testis.

Otorrhoea : A muco-purulent discharge from the ear.

Ozaena: A foul odour present in certain cases of atrophic syphilitic and other forms of chronic
rhinitis.

Panaritium : Felon; whitlow.
Paraplegia : Paralysis of both the lower extremities.

Paralysis: Partial or complete loss or temporary interruption of normal function of some part
of body.

Paresis : Partial paralysis.
Paronychia : Felon; whitlow.

paroxysm: A sudden attack or intensification of the symptoms of a disease usually occurring
periodically.

Parturition : Giving birth to a child.

Pearly : Like a pear] as in colour or lustre.

Pemphigus: A disease marked by formation of bullae which after absorption, leave
pigmentary spots.

Pertusis : Whooping cough.

Phlebitis : Inflammation of vein.

Phagadena: An ulcer that rapidly spreads peripherally destroying tissues as it increases in area.

Phlegmonous: Denoting inflammation of subcutaneous tissues.

Physometra : Passage of air from the vagina.

Phlyctenula : Small red nodule of lymphoid cells, with ulcerated apex, on conjunctiva.
Pining boys: Boys who have wasted away through grief, pain, longing, etc.

Piteous moaning: Groaning or expressing low mournful sound of sorrows attracting pity.

Plethoric habit: An abnormal condition due to increase of blood in the circulatory system or
in some part of it resulting in a state of being too full.

Plica-polonica : Matting of hair with crusts and vermin.

Pneumogastric nerve : Vagus nerve; Tenth cranial nerve.

Pollution : Discharge of semen, either voluntary or involuntary, other than during coitus.
Polypus : A morbid growth from a mucus membrane.

Pot bellied : Person with abdomen resembling a round shaped pot.

Precocious : Prematurely developed in mind.

Priapism : Persistent erection of the penis.

Prolapsus: Falling down of an organ on other part from its normal position.

” recti: Falling down or dropping of the rectum.

Prosopalgia : Trigeminal neuralgia.

Prostration : Utter physical or mental exhaustion.

Pruritus vulvae: Itching of the external genitalia in the female.

Pseudo membranous : Development of false membrane.

Psoriasis : Skin disease of many varieties, characterized by scaly red patches.
Ptyalism : Salivation.

Ptosis : Droopping of the upper eyelids.

Ptomaine poisoning: Poisoning through decayed food materials; Food poisoning.
Puerperal : Relating to the period usualy six weeks after childbirth.

Puberty: Age at which reproductive organs become developed—18 to 16 years in boys and 12
to 14 years in girls.

Puffy: Swollen; fat and obese.
Putrescence : Rottenness; putridity.

Ss

Sapraemia: A form of blood poisoning caused by toxic products of micro-organism.

Sanguinous: Bloody; plethoric; abounding in blood.


Glossary 751

Pt EEE IEEE ESSE ed

Scald : A burn caused by a hot liquid or hot moist vapour.
Scirrhus: Hard cancer with predominance of fibrous tissue.
Scrofulous: A glandular swelling which predisposes to tuberculosis.
Scurf: Dandruff; branny desquamation.

Sclerosis: Induration or hardening of chronic inflammatory origins; jnduration with
hypertrophy of connective tissue.

Scrawny: 1. Very thin, skinny and bony.
2. Stunted or scrubby.

Sebaceous: The gland which secretes the substance whose ducts open into hair follicles.
Secundine: The after Urth, or the placenta.

Septicaemia: A morbid condition due to presence or reproduction of pathologic bacteria in
the blood.

Serous membrane: The lining membrane of any one of the, great splanchnic or lymph
cavities.

Sedentary habits: Inactive habits.

Shattering: Run down: broken down.

Shingles: Herpes zoster.

Similimum: That which is most similar in nature, character and action.
Slimy: Slippery.

Somnambulism: Habitual walking in sleep.

Snappish: Cross or irritable; uncivil.

Snuffles: Catarrhal discharge from the nasal mucous membrane in infants.
Somersault: Turning the body one full revolution with heels over head.
Sneaking: Cowardly; secret; underhand.

Sopor: Deep sleep.

Sordes: Foul matter collected on lips and teeth in low fevers.
Spermatorrhoea: An involuntary discharge of semen, without orgasm.
Stasis : Stagnation of blood or other fluid.

Stercoraceous: Consisting of, or contain faeces.

Staining linen: Making the towel dirty with faeces or urine,
Strangury: Difficulty in micturition; slow and painful discharge of urine
Stupor: Partial or nearly complete unconsciousness,

Strangling: Killing by squeezing the throat with hands nose, etc., causing suffocation or
choking in any manner.

Strumous: Scrofulous; goitrous.


752 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

a

Styes: Inflammation of one of the sebaceous glands of the eyelids.

Sulky: Gloomy; dismal; sullen.

Sunken: 1. Submerged. 2. Depressed. 3. Below the base of the surrounding or adjoining area,
Suppuration: Formation of, conversion into, or discharge of pus.

Sub-sultus tendinum : Twitching movement of muscles

and tendons in typhoid condition.

Suture: 1. Surgical stitch or seam.
2. Line of junction of adjacent cranial or facial bones.

Swashing sensation : Sensation as of washing with splashing of water or the sound of this.
Swarthy: Having a dark complexion; dusky.
Synchronous: Occurring at the same time.

Sycosis menti: Pustular folliculitis of the beard; barber’s itch.

T

Tabes dorsalis : Loco-motor ataxia.

Taciturn : Almost always silent, not liking to talk.

Tachycardia : An abnormally fast, rapid heartbeat,

Tell-tale face: Outward indication on face on the internal condition of health.
Temperament : One’s customary form or natural disposition,

(a) Bilious t. : In which it is marked by more or less general pigmentation, high blood
presssure, slow pulse, well developed muscle, strong appetite and tenacityl of
purpose.

(b) Choleric t. : Bilious t.

(c) Nervous t. : In which the subject is mentally, and physically alert, with, rapid
pulse, excitability, but not having always fixity of purpose.

(d) Leucophlegmatic t. : In which there is pallor of skin slow and shallow respiration,
sluggish circulation and a tendency to inflammation of skin and lymphatics; same
as scrofulous diathesis.

(e) Lymphatic t. : Same as leucophlegmatic t.

(f) Sanguine t, : Which has a fresh complexion; light hair and eyes; a full pulse, good
digestion, and a quick but not lasting temper.

(g) Melancholic t : One marked by emaciation, irritability, and a pessimistic out look
on the world.

Tenacios : That clings, touch, adhesive, sticky.

Tettery eruption : Any of various skin diseases, such as eczema, characterised by itching.


Glossary 753

Titillating : That which gives a sensation of tickling.

Tonicity : Normal condition of tone or tension.

Tonic : Characterised by continuous tension

Tormenting : Great pain or anguish, physical or menial suffering.

Tornado : A violently whirling column of air extending downward from cloud.
Torpid : Inactive or sluggish in functioning.

Too ugly to live: Utter dislike of one’s own life.

Transudation : Passage of fluid through a membrane in the surrounding tissue.
Trauma : A bodily injury, wound or shock.

Trifles: Something of little value or importance; a trivial thing.

Trismus: Tetanic spasm of the muscles of jaw.

Tympanitic condition: A condition like drum or drum head.

Typhoid state : A condition of weakness, feeble pulse, and low-delirium, characterstic in
typhoid.

U

Unweildy: Awkward shape or form. far”

* Urticaria: (Hives or nettle-rash). A skin disease marked by transient eruption of wheats.

id

Vaginismus : Painful Spasm of the vagina due io local hyperaesthesia. ‘

Varicocele A Enlargement of the veins of the spermattc cord
Varicose vein: A greatly enlarged and, controled vein.
Variola: Small-pox. : .
Vertigo: Giddiness or dizziness. - : ‘ .

Vicarious menstruation; Habitual monthly discharge from a substituted way and
abnormal situation; such acceding from nose.

Vice versa: The order or relation being reversed; conversely.
Virgin : A woman or gir] who has had no sexual intercourse,
Virulent : Extremely ‘heinous or injurious. ‘

Voluptuogs itching: The itch which excites the sexual desire,
Vomitus : Matter that has been vomited.


754 - Jeavbuth Un cAI wicDICA

w |

Water brash: Burning sensation in the oesophagus and stomach with sour eructation.
Wart: A small usually hard, tumorous growth on the skin.
Wrath : Intense anger, rage, fury.

Y.

Yielding: Flexible; submissive.

Zymotic diseases : Any disease due. to or causing fermentation; an infectious disease.

Cansinosin Th a a, a
fan 2 fave tebe
Appratena Blue Scle nots une Cros}

z 1

Az “heel tet Se Symre ¢ *

In prm+ = Dpsorrhen ers

i = Audesis Genin phd)
C = Conspipation y

2k
Re Reference 4, From “tobe D =Diebebs

A * Anemia C= Ca ncee
Te Taberculrsy s
ngtd hasta ay Ac Ania
{ 2 Deri hl
7) « Unhapr pase
F = Feng
F * Frit

———— ee

C= Charetur
b4 prp nee
a


Te Inf Anmmactory Myers in prt
Recurrent Fever
Pneumont's

Wihopls cour

Nz Neetrnal *g <

O= Offers < Eeot cast
7 Scuth Cooat

$4] Kenee-
ep _ the pospon
L+yeo
Sleep om bouek. lack head (puts)

| = Snnsom nin wi) Thowt Pepeary
Shoat nop flee beltve—

N= Nepabie Mbanatin f Symons
- Eartidjeun % iki

Crawi
FoFat ] donee
E> XG] Ayamen
me Milka

57s
 emotions, from draught of air, from fruits, sexual excess and loss of sleep.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache caused as a result of HAEMORRHAGE, SEXUAL EXCESS OR LOSS OF VITAL FLUID and sleeplessness or suppressed coryza.

Location: Headache from occiput over the whole head.

Sensation: Sensation as if the skull would burst. Sensation as if the brain were balancing to and from and is striking against skull, causing great pain.

Character of pain: Confusion and dullness of the head as if intoxicated. Intense throbbing of head and carotids. Head is inclined to draw backwards.

Modality: Headache is worse in open air, on stepping and better in warm room. Headache becomes worse by slight touch, contact and mental Exertion, but relieved by hard pressure. Headache is aggravated
          on sitting or by lying down; must stand or walk.
 
Concomitants: Vertigo on waking at night. Nausea and vomiting of sour food, bile and mucus.

Gastro intestinal tract :


Mouth : Toothache while the baby sucks the breast. Throbbing toothache, aggravated by slightest touch, but REELIEVED BY PRESSING THE TEETH FIRMLY AGAINST EACH OTHER and by hot application. Tongue coated white or yellow; tongue dirty; dryness of mouth with profuse saliva day and night; every thing tastes sour or bitter.

Stomach and abdomen : There is no desire for eating or drinking, although there is appetite. Vomiting of undigested food, of sour mttcus, bile or blood. TYMPANITIC ABDOMEN, with excessive

flatulence and belching which gives no relief and consequently great distension of entire abdomen and borborygmus. Sensation as if the abdomen is full of gas; to get relief from which the patient tries to belch, but on

eructation, there is no tangible relief. Each food particle seems vo have turned into gas (lod., Kali carb.).Worse from eating fruits, fish, wine, etc. Abdomen feels sore and tender; Aggravation by slight

touch, and RELIEVED BY HARD PRESSURE AND DOUBLING UP. There is canine hunger without any special desire to eat Haematemesis with great loss of blood. Gastralgia with acidity, bloating and sour

eructation. After eating, the abdomen feels full and tight There is agonising pain in the abdomen with pinching coll. COMPELLING THE PATIENT TO BEND DOUBLE, OBVIOUSLY TO GET RELIEF

(Colocynth). Pain in right hypochondrium, FROM GALL-STONE. Spleen and liver are enlarged and swollen, with jaundice. Liver is painful to touch, but relieved by hard pressure.

Diarrhoea : China is suited to both acute and chronic diarrhoea. The prolonged, long standing chronic diarrhoea causes the patient to be BROKEN DOWN AND PUMPED OUT, debilitated and non-
             recognisable. Diarrhoea persists only at night.

Causation: By taking fruits.

Character of stool: Loose, brownish, painless, with fermentation, belching and borborygmus in bowels with passage of excessively offensive flatus; with undigested food particles; sometimes
                    cadaverous smelling.

Modality: Aggravated at night with marked periodicity. Belching gives no relief.

Concomitants: With diarrhoea there is profound debility. In chronic cases, there is history of gradual onset, stool more and more watery, pale and pinkish with rapid emaciation of the body.

Liver : China is one of the best remedies in chronic liver troubles. There is pain in the right hypochondrium and often the liver may be left below the ribs, enlarged, hard and sensitive to touch, the
        skin is yellow, urine dark coloured, stool light, lacking the colour due to improper secretion of bile.

Anaemia : The quantity and quality of the blood are alterec becomes thin, watery; circulation lacks energy and general debility, anaemic conditions are set in.China is very useful in anaemia or debility that follows the LOSS OF VITAL FLUID. HAEMORRHAGE, PROLONGED and EXCESSIVE LACTATION DIARRHOEA, SUPPURATION OR SEXUAL excess. The face presents a pale, hippocratic expression; eyes are sunken and surrounded by
          dark rings, with ringing and, buzzing sound in ears and desire for sour things.

Neuralgia :Neuralgia pains are relieved by China when the pains are drawing and tearing in character. The part feels as though sprained or sore. At the slightest touch, the pain returns and increases to a great
           severity, and is relieved by hard pressure.

Rheumatic pains also show similar character.

Haemorrhage :

From every orifice of, the body, such as mouth, nose, bowels or rectum, long coulinued haemorrhage occurs with desire for sour things and ringing and buzzing sound on the ears.

Menses :

Time: First menses too early.

Quantity: Profuse with pain.

Duration: Too long lasting.

Character of blood: Dark clotted blood.

Modality: Parts very sensitive to slight touch, but relieved by hard pressure.

Concomitants: Purulent leucorrhoea in place of menses. Ovaritis from sexual excess. Anaemia may also be present. Insomnia after haemorrhage. Vertigo and menstrual colic are present. Along with this,
              there may also be ringing in ears.

Intermittent fever : Various Kinds of intermittent fevers are manifested by China. It may be of the tertian, or double tertian, quotidian type, or the paroxysms may return every seventh or fourteenth day. PERIODICITY is
                     well-marked in the fevers but it is never at night. Moreover, the fever is of anticipating type; anticipates several hours each succeeding chill. The various stages of fever are well-marked, i.e. chill, heatand sweat stages.

1. Chill: Chill is preceded by palpitation, anxiety and hunger and sometimes headache too. Chill comes generally in the forenoon, but anticipating type. Chill over the body, increased by
         drinking water. Chill of short duration. There is thirst before and after but not during the chill stage. The patient wants to be near the stove, but it increases the chill. Chill returns every week.

2. Heat: Long lasting heat which frequently sets in late after chill. The patient wants to uncover during heat stage. The heat stage may be thirstless or with thirst. Even if there is great thrist,
         the patient wants water only to wet the mouth. The face is fiery red during the heat stage. There is headache and often delirium if the heat is too seyere.

3. Sweat: Sweat stage comes immediately after heat. There is profuse debilitating sweat. There is great thirst during sweat. The sweat does not give any relief to the patient. Perspiration may
          be noticed in sleep too. Apyrexia is marked with debility, restlessness, loss of appetite or great hunger; anaemia, congestion,
           backache, oedema, scanty urine, soreness in the liver and spleen.

Respiratory organs :

Hoarseness of voice; suffocation and suffocative catarrh; influenza with debility. There is rattling in the chest with violent, hacking cough after every meal. Haemoptysis may be present. Oedema of glottis

and dyspnoea may be of regular and frequent occurrence. Cough is a constant factor, which is excited by talking and laughing. After coughing there may be expectoration of clearer blood stained mucous or

sputum, with oppression of chest and stitching pain in the chest.There may also be palpitation and congestion of chest with cold hands and intermittent weak pulse.

One hand icy cold and the other warm. Skin is extremely sensitive to touch, but relieved by hard  pressure. Coldness of the skin with debilitating sweat.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From slightest touch, draugh to air every other day, loss of:vital fluids, at night,after eating and bending over.

Amelioration: By bending double hard pressure, open air and warmth.

Relations :

Complementary to: Ferrum met.

Antidotes : Hepar sulph., Nux vom.

Antidoted by: Nat, mur. and Carbo veg.

Antidote to: Ars, Calc., Cham., Ferr., Hell., fod., Merc., Sulph. and Ver, alb.

Remedies of same family: Coffea, Ipeacac. Incompatible: After Dig., Selen.


chapter 78 CLEMATIS EREGTA

Virgin's Bower Ranunculaceae

INTRODUCTION

Clematis, like other Ranunculi, is a direct irritant of the skin producing inflammation and vesication. It was used by Stoerck before Hahnemann’s time in cancerous and other foul ulcers, inveterate skin eruptions, syphilis and
          rheumatism.

CLINICAL

Eye affection, Gonorrhoea, Headache. Glandular affection. Rheumatism. Stricture of urethra. Skin affection. Toothache.

SPHERE OF ACTION

It acts on skin, glands, genito-urinary organs, especially testicles, and mucous membrane.

PATHOGENESIS

It is a direct irritant of the skin producing inflammation and vesication. It inflames and infiltrates tis-sues and so causes swelling and induration of glands.

CONSTITUTION

It acts best on light-haired people; torpid, cachectic conditions.

All the three miasms—Psoric, sycotic and syphylitic are in the back ground. Chiefly Sycotic.
GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Painful swelling and induration of the glands.

2) Gonorrhoeal orchitis, the testicle is painful indurated and hard as a stone with pain along the spermatic cord, especially right side,

3) Toothache relieved by holding cold water in the mouth.

4) Interrupted flow of urine with burning sensation during micturition.

5) Aggravation of all skin symptoms by the heat of bed and-, from washing.

6) Nearly all symptoms aggravate at night.

7) Aggravation during increasing moon, amelioration dur-ing waning moon.

8) Ailments from : Suppressed gonorrhoea.



PARTICULARS

Headache :

Boring pain in temples with confusion and heaviness of the head which aggravates while bending head backward and amelioration in open air.

Toothache

Toothache from tobacco. Teeth feel too long (Mezerium.) Worse at night and better by holding cold water in the mouth and drawing cold air in. (rev. of Staphy.)

Urinary symptoms

The remedy is very useful for urinary troubles. There is frequent, scanty dribbling urination with burning and sense of constriction in urethra. Patient has to wait a long time before he can Urinate. The
flow is slow or interrupted. Pain worse at night.

Skin

It is one of the very good eruptive medecines. It produces vesicular eruptions which resembles Rhus. (Anac., Grot. Tig., Fago, Rhus Yen., Xerophyllum.) Vesicles filled with yellow fluid with induration under
the vesicles. Eruptions that come out upon the occiput, face and hands which look red, moist with burning and itches intensely. Eruptions red and moist during the increasing moon, pale and dry during the
decreasing moon. Patient has aversion to be washed. Aggravation while washing in cold water, in warmth of bed, at night. Amelioration in open air, from scratching, from sweating.

Relationship

Autidotes : Bry., Camph.


chapter 79 COCA

Erythroxylon Coca CLOTAR MULLER Linae

INTRODUCTION

Coca is used by the natives of South America as we use coffee, tea and tobacco. So it is like tea and coffee in arresting tissue changes and enabling those who take it to undergo unusual fatigues. It contains an
alkaloid called cocaine.

CLINICAL

Angina Pectoris. Asthma. Cough. Debility. Dyspnoea. Carries of teeth. Insomnia. Mountain sickness. Nervous exhaustion.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) The mountaineers’ remedy—Useful in complaints incidental to mountain climbing such as palpitation, dyspnoea, anxiety & insomnia.

2) Suited to persons wearing out under the physical and mental strain of a busy life, and who suffer from exhausted nerves & brain (Fl.Acid., Kali Phos., Nux Vom.)

3) Shortness of breath in old people and in those who use tobacco and whisky in excess.

4) Want of breath in those engaged in athletic sports.

5) Longing for alcoholic liquors and tobacco for the accustomed stimulants.

6) Violent palpitation : From incarcerated flatus (Arg.N., Nux V.) from over exertion, from heart strain (Arn., Bor., Caust.)

7) Sleepy but can find no rest anywhere.

8) Mind : Coca patients are extremely bashful & timid. They are always ill at ease in society. Melancholic from nervous exhaustion. They are sad, irritable & delights in solitude and obscurity. They lose all sense of right and wrong.

9) Ailments : Bad effects : From mountain climbing or ballooning (Ars.) Bad effects of stimulants, alcohol, tobacco.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : From Ascending, in high attitudes. Amelioration—From wine, from riding in open
air.

chapter 80 COCCULUS

Cocculus Indicus HAHNEMANN Menispermaceae Indian Cockle

INTRODUCTION

For this poisonous vegetable plant Hahnemann says, “This vegetable substance, used hitherto only for destroying some noxious agents and for stupefying fishes so that they may be caught by hand, was first employed by myself as a medicine”. It is the picrotoxin alkaloid content of Cocculus which possesses the toxic
effect when given in crude, form and serves the therapeutic purpose when administered in dynamic doses.

CLINICAL

Brain affection, Cholera, Colic, Convulsion, Fevers, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Memory weak, Menstrual troubles, Mental excitement, Paralysis, Rheumatism, Sea-sickness, Sleep affection, from loss of sleep, Somnolence,
Vertigo Vomiting etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It chiefly affects the cerebro-spinal system, voluntary muscular system and
sensorium.

PATHOGENESIS

Acting on the cerebro-spinal system, it produces great debility. It causes paralytic weakness of the spine and especially of its motor nerves resulting in weakness of the legs. Knees give out when walking. Soles of feet feel as if asleep. Convulsions, both clonic and tonic are a special characteristic of its action. It produces vomiting of cerebral origin rather than gastric.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Especially suited for women and children with light hair and eyes, who suffer severely Curing menstruation and pregnancy, unmarried and childless women. Also adopted to book-worms, sensitive romantic girls with irregular
menstruation, onanist and persons debilitated by sexual excesses.

Temperament: Mind and sluggish temperament, nervous persons. Relation with heat and cold: As a whole there is aggravation from sun.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.



GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Vertigo, nausea and vomiting from riding in carriage, boat or railroad car, or euen looking at a boat in motion; sea-sickness and car-sickness are the grand keynotes of Cocculus.

2. Great lassitude of the whole body: it requires exertion to stand firmly, feels too weak to talk loudly (Stan met.).

3. Sensation of weakness or hollowness in various organs e.g. head, chest, abdomen, etc,

4, Time Passes too quickly (rev. of Arg. nit., Alumina, Med.).

5. Trembling of the arms and legs, usually from excitement.

6. Many symptoms aggravate during menstrual period, such as piles. During menses debility, nervousness and anger etc.

7. Leucorrhoea in place of menses (Nux mos.).

8. When fever assumes a slow, “sneaking” nervous form with vertigo and disposition to anger, Cocculus may be thought of.

9. Aggravation from motion generally; even least jar is unbearable.

10. Mind : Times passes too quickly. The patient cannot realise that a whole night has passed. A week has gone, but it seems a moment. Cannot bear contradiction; easily offended, every trifle matter makes him angry. There is slowness of comprehension. Cannot find the right word to express his thoughts, so slowly does his mind work. What has passed, he.cannot remember.
Forgets what he has just read. Great lassitude of the whole mind. Feels too weak. All the mental symptoms are due to grief, anxiety, vexation, prolonged LOSS OF
SLEEP.

11. Ailments from loss of sleep, night watching, anger, grief, vexation and mental excitement.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

The patient has very severe sick headache.

Causation: Headache is caused due to loss of sleep, mental excitement, grief, anxiety or vexation.

Time: At each menstrual period.

Location: Headache starts at the nape of neck and occiput extending to spine.

Sensation: Sense of emptiness in head: opening and shutting sensation, especially in occiput.

Character of pain : As if tightly bound by a cord. There is pressing throbbing type of pain.

Modalities : Aggravation by lying on back and from carriage riding.


Cocculus 225



Vertigo : Sensation as if intoxicated pain in eyes, from rising in bed or by motion of the carriage, especially when rising or sitting up.

Abdomen : Sensation in abdomen of cutting and rubbing, on every movement, as of a sharp stone, hollowness. Crampy pain in stomach during and after meal. Loss of appetite with metallic taste in mouth. There is NAUSEA AND VOMITING FROM RIDING IN, CARRIAGE, BOAT, RAIL ROAD AND CAR OR even looking at a boat on motion.

Female gential organs :

Menses : Coculus is an excellent remedy for dysmenorrhoea.

Time: Too early.

Character of blood : Dark and clotted blood.

Character of pain: During the flow, there is spasmodic colic, pressing pain in uterine region, followed by haemorrhoids.

During menstruation, the patient is so weak that she is scarcely abje to stand from weakness of lower limbs.

Concomitant: Piles during menses.

Leucorrhoea : In place of menses or between periods. Copious discharge like the washing of meat, serous, ichorous and bloody.

Paralysis : Of face, muscles, limbs. For paralysis of the muscles any where, Cocculus is an excellent remely.

There is trembling of arms and legs from excitement. Pain in the limbs, lower limbs very weak; very much painful; painful when flexed.

Worse after sleep.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : From eating, drinking, sleeping, smoking, talking, CARRIAGE RIDING, motions, rising up, during menstrual period.

Relation :

Antidotes : Coffea, Nux vomica, Cup., Cham.

Antidoted by: Camphor, Cham., Cup., Ign., Nux vom.

Compare: Ignatia and Nux vomica in paralytic symptoms.


CHAPTER:81COFFEA URUUA

pe
Coffee HAHNEMANN Rubiaceae 


INTRODUCTION |

The effects of Coffea cruda have to be considered separately from those of Coffea tosta, since the roasting converts much of the Caffeine into Coffeone or Methylamine, which gives to
Coffee its aroma. But the effects are scarcely distinguishable, and I have not attempted to keep them strictly apart. Coffea Cruda is one of the Nash’s trio of pain remedies, others being
Aconite Nap & Chamomilla.

CLINICAL

Abdominal colic. Crural Neuralgia. Headache. Hyperaesthesia. Hysteria. Heart-affection of Joy-ill effects of. Migrain. Neuralgia. Sciatica. Sleeplessness. Toothache.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION
It has seven special centres of action through the cerebrospinal nervous system.

1) Cerebrum : Here it stimulates the mentality and produces obstinate insomnia.

2) Cord, posterior columns : It paralyzes the sensory nerve filaments.

3) Circulation : It stimulates the vasomotor nerves and increases blood pressure.

4) Kidneys : Here it increases the arterial blood pressure, produces diuresis and
   diminishes the urea.
5) Sexual organs : Producing great excitement of these organs which is followed by paresis.

6) Digestive organs : It first stimulates the digestive organs and then prostrates them.

7) Vagi: It very powerfully stimulates the respiratory centre.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make up : It is suited to tall, lean, stooping persons with dark complexion.

Temperament: Sanguine choleric temperament.

Relation with heat » cold—Chilly patient.

Miasm : Psora.



Coffea Griff 227

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Oversensitiveness of all the senses ; sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch etc. become more acute.

2) Unusual activity of mind and body.

3) Pain : Great sensitiveness to pain, seem almost insupportable, driving patient to despair, tossing about in anguish (In Aconite, Chamomilla and Nux Vomica there is also irritability of high degree. But the difference is that Aconite is fearful

          and anxious, dreads things ; Chamo. is spiteful & uncivil, Nux Vomica is sullen, keeps the eyes shut, does not wish to speak or have anything to do with anyone ; and Coffea on the other hand is wakeful, on the constant move.)

4) Sleeplessness with physical excitement through mental exaltation.

5) Hasty eating & drinking (Bell., Hep.)

6) Headache from over — mental exertion, thinking & talking, worse in open air.

7) Toothache relieved by holding ice water in the mouth but returns when water becomes warm (Bis., Bry., Puls.; Cham.)

8) Mind : Mental symptoms of coffea are very peculiar & characteristic. Coffea is characterised by extreme sensitiveness, nervous agitation and restlessness. Great and unusual activity of the mind and body is an important point with Coffea
          cruda. The mind is full of ideas & is active with plans & fancies. There is oversensitiveness of all the senses such as sight, hearing, taste, touch, smell etc.and are equally acute. Due to all this mental exaltation patient becomes sleepless ; there is wide awake condition with impossibility to close the eyes. He feels pains
          intensely, it seems almost insupportable and drives him to despair. He, tosses about in agony. He is a great subject to ailments arising from sudden emotion and pleasurable surprise. He weBps from delight. Weeping alternates with laughing. He
          is hasty especially in eating and drinking.

9) Ailments from : Effects of sudden emotion, especially pleasurable ones, fear or fright, wine, overfatigue and long journeys, overmental exertion, thinking, talking.

PARTICULARS

Headache:

Causation : Overmental exertion, talking, thinking, effects of sudden emotion especially pleasurable Ones,

Location : One sided headache.

Sensation : There is sensation as from a nail driven into the brain ; as if brain were torn or dashed to Pieces ; as if head was too small, as if head would burst and fly to pieces if she moved.

Modality : Agg.—Mental exertion, thinking, open air.

Ame.—By warmth.




Toothache : Intermittent, jerking toothache temporarily relieved by holding ice water in the mouth but returns when water becomes warm. The pain is excessive and causes weeping, trembling, nausea & tossing
about. Coffea toothache can be compared with the following drugs.

Bismuth : Pressure in the region of malar bones relieved by running about and holding cold water in mouth but aggravated when water becomes warm ; the patient is ill humor, morose and discontented

but still solitude is unbearable.

Bryonia : Toothache relieved by cold water worse by taking anything warm in mouth. Pain shoots from one tooth to another, also in head and cheeks. Toothache momentarily relieved by lying on painful
side. Great thirst, constipated bowels and mental irritability, coated tongue are concomitant symptoms present with toothache.

Chamomilla : Toothache if anything warm is taken into mouth, on entering warm room, in bed, from coffee, during menses and pregnancy. There is irritable and whining mood during the pain.

Pulsatilla : Stitching digging pain worse in evening or early night. Toothache worse in warm room, warm bed, when eating but not from chewing from anything warm in mouth ; better from walking about

& ceases entirely in open air. Toothache with chilliness of body & no thirst.

Neuralgia : The neuralgia of the face is a common feature of old coffee drinkers. Coffea is a very good remedy for neuralgia when the pains are unbearable, driving patient to despair. Patient feels
perfectly discouraged and tosses in agony. He cries & throws about himself. There is fear of fresh air and of the least noise. Crural neuralgia worse by motion, afternoon & night, better by pressure.

Modality : Agg. : In open air, touch Ame. : By warmth.

Heart symptoms : Violent irregular palpitation of heart with trembling of limbs. Nervous palpitation after excessive joy, surprise. Rapid high tension pulse and urinary suppression.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : Excessive emotion (joy), narcotics, strong odors, noise, open air, cold night.

Amelioration : Warmth, from lying down, holding ice in mouth,

Relation : Compare ; Aco., Cham., Ign., Sulph. Incompatible : Canth., Caust., Coc., Ign.


CHAPTER : 82 COLCHICUM AUTUMNALE


Meadow Saffron STAPF Liliaceae


INTRODUCTION

It is a plant found in Europe. The fresh bulb is taken for preparation of mother tincture. It has received the name Colchicum autumnale because it blooms during autumn and usually the symptoms
are also aggravated during autumn. So it is a useful remedy for the autumnal dysentery. It is also an indispensable remedy for gout and _ rheumatism. Dr. Hughes says that this medicine has a
diuretic action and it increases elimination of uric acid of by the kidneys. Gout is a metabolic disease pertaining to defects in purine metabolism. It explains its usefulness
in cases of gout. The Allopathic school has used and abused this drug for any gouty condition, says Tyler.

CLINICAL

Cholera, Cough, Colic, Cramp, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Dysentery, Gout, Castro-intestinal disorders, Fever, Nausea, Rheumatism, Smell-intolerance of Vomiting, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Colchicum acts on disgestive tract, heart, pericardium, kidneys and joints.

PATHOGENESIS

This agent irritates the digestive organs and produces nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite, colic, diarrhoea and painful cramps. It also produces inflammation of intestine,
leading to sloughing which ultimately passes out of scrapping of intestine in stool with blood and mucous. It also produces inflammation of joints with sensitiveness to touch.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Robust persons of vigorous constitution and diseases of old people. Leucophlegmatic constitutions.

Temperament: Irritable and melancnolic temperament. Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Rheumatic and Gouty diathesis.



230 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Nausea, VOMITING and FAINTNESS AT THE SMELL OF COOKING FOOD (Arsenic cannot bear the smell or sight of food; Sepia too has nausea from smell or sight of food. But in Colchicum, it is PAINFULLY ACUTE, especally the smell of cooking eggs, fish and meat.).

2. Abdomen is immensely distended with gas; feels as it would burst.

3. Dysentery usually in autumn; stool contains scraping of intestine with characteristic nausea; mucus and shreddy particles in large quantity pass out [Canth.,Arg. nit.].

4, Gout : The affected parts are very sensitive to touch and motion. Patient screams with pain when touching a joint or stubbing a toe.

5. Rheumatic pains are of drawing, tearing, pressing nature, shifts from one joint to another.

6. Colchicum Dysentery and Rheumatism are extremely painful.

7. Urine is dark coloured; inky urine.

8. Tingling in finger nails, is a characteristic of colchicum says T.F. Allen.oon

9. Aggravation from motion is marked as in Bryonia.

10. External impressions, such as light, noise, strong odours, contact, bad manners, etc. make him almost beside himself (Nux vom.), and his sufferings seem to be intolerable.

11. Ailments from grief and misdeeds of others; wetting; checked perspiration.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal System :

There is profuse secretion of saliva.

The smell of food causes nausea, even faintness and vomiting. There may be vomiting of mucus, bile and food. Buming or icy coldness in stomach with craving for various things.

Abdomen is enormously distended and feels as if it would burst. Dysentery, cholera, gastralgia, flatulence or autumna dysentery, etc. are successfully treated by Colchicum.

Dysentery : Causation; Autumn, getting wet, checked perspiration and night.

Character of stool: Very offensive stool and offensive flatus. Frequent stool, profuse and abundant in quantity. Yellowish stool, with whitish mucous and blood. Stoo! contains scrapings of intestine.
Stool sometimes passes with violent tenesmus. Constant ineffectual efforts to pass faeces (Nux vom.): Spasm of the sphincter during discharge of stool with shuddering over the back,

Modalities: Aggravation in autumn, mental exertion and amelioration by lying still.


Colchicum Autumnale 231

Urinary System :

Pain in the region of kidney. More the urging, more the discharge of urine. Urine is COPIOUS. WATERY DARK, TURBID AND INKY containing albumen and sugar. Tenesmus of bladder and burning in urethra.

Urine has sour smell and is acidic in reaction. Scanty urine with offensive smell may also be found. Decomposed blood may sometimes pass with the urine. Urethra hurts as if it is raw.


Gout or Rheumatism :

Causation: Getting wet, heat of summer, checked prespiration and exertion.

Location: Rheumatic pain of the clavicle, neck, shoulders, arms and back, preventing motion of head. Pain in the elbow joint, forearm, waist and ligaments of finger joints and of the great toes.

Pain with lameness in the arms which makes it impossible for the patient to hold the lightest thing.

Character of pain: Flying pain in the hips. Tearing pain in thighs and knee joints, with swelling in patella, tibia, calf muscles, ankles and toes. Tingling pain in toes. Patient screams with pain when

touched. The striking feature is that the pain has tendency to move about froni one joint to another: from one side to the other, from below upwards or from above downwards; with or without swelling.

Concomitants: Nausea, faintness at the smell of cooking food. Passes inky urine or pale urine. Great distension of abdomen. Sensation as if the abdomen would burst with gas. Involvement of heart

and pericardium with dropsical condition of hands, feet and abdomen.

Modalities: Aggravation by motion, summer weather, autumn and touch. Better by rest and lying down.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From cold damp weather, smell of food, MOTION, during autumn, mental emotion or exhaustion and effects of hard study.

Amelioration: By warmth and lying down quietly.

Relation :

Compare: Bryonia in vomiting. If the patient lies perfectly stilt, the disposition to vomit is less urgent. Every motion renews it (Bry.).

Antidoted by: Bell., Camphor, Cocculus, Nux vom., Puls, Spigelia. It antidotes: Thuja.

CHAPTER: 83 COLLINSONIA CANADENSIS

Stone Root DR. BURT Labiatae

INTRODUCTION
Collinsonia Can. is an important haemor- rhoidal remedy of our materia medica. Most of the symptoms of collin. are due to portal congestion ajid pelvic congestion. Due to its congestive action it produces severe
constipation, piles, dysmenorrhoea, headache and even heart symptoms etc.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS |

1) Congestion especially of portal & pelvic region resulting in dysmenorrhoea and haemorrhoids.

2) Chronic, painful, bleeding piles with sensation as if sticks, sand or gravel had lodged in rectum. Vascular engorgement of rectum. Most obstinate constipation with protruding piles. There is congestion of pelvic viscera with piles in later
   months of pregnancy, haemorrhoidal dysentery with tenesmus.

3) Constipation : It is very admirable remedy for constipation and usually presents in association with the haemorrhoids, headache and flatulence. In Collinsonia constipation is generally due to congestive inertia of lower bowel. (Sulph. Sepia).
                  Stool is sluggish and hard with pain and great flatulence. Dr. Nash has permanently cured a case of obstinate constipation with Collinsonia in a patient who averaged only two stools a week for years and had taken any amount of cathartics without
                  any lasting relief.
 
4) Heart complaints associated with piles. Palpitation in patients subject to piles and indigestion. Heart’s action persistently rapid but weak. In Collinsonia after relief of heart complaints old piles reappear or suppressed menses return.

5) Pruritus in pregnancy with haemorrhoids, unable to lie down. The genitals are swollen and inflammed.

Géneral Modalities :

_Agg. : The slightest mental emotion or excitement aggravate the symptoms (Arg Nit.), from cold: Ame. : By heat.


CHAPTER:84 COLOCYNTHIS


Bitter or HAHNEMANN Cucurbitaceae

Squirting Cucumber fe

INTRODUCTION

In traditional medicine, Colocynthis has been used as a purgative. But in Hemoeopathy, during proving, the range of action of this medicine made Hahnemann place it high among  the remedies for COLIC. Nash says, “No remedy produces more severe coHc than this one and no remedy works more promptly.”

CLINICAL

Colic, Biliary colic, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Dysmenorrhoea, Headache, Menstrual, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Sciatica, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Jt acts on visceral organs, colon rectum and nerves such as abdominal plexus, trigeminal and sciatic nerves.

PATHOGENESIS

It acts upon the colon and rectum to cause colic and evacuation of blood and mucus. It may, even, produce peritonitis. It, acts on the female genital organs’causing ,ovarian
neuralgia. Its action on nerves causes neuralgia, sciatica and lumbago.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. The strongest characteristic calling for Colocynth is TERRIBLE COLIC WITH  AGONISING PAIN in abdomen compelling the patient to bend double. Relief is obtained by MOTION and HARD PRESSURE and the motion is kept up steadily by the patient
   while the pain lasts. Colic may occur by itself or with dysentery, cholera, etc.

2. Neuralgic affection and rheumatic troubles. Dr. Hughes quotes Dr. Bahr as saying that Colocynth is useful in rheumatic colic and Plumbum in neuralgic colic.

8. Rheumatic pains affecting the joints are much aggravated by motion and better by rest and pressure.

4. Worse from 4.9 p.m., is another characteristic of Colocynth.

5. Shooting pain like lightning shocks down the whole limb, left hip, left thigh, left knnd the popliteal fossa. Crampy pain in the thigh as though screwed in a vice. The patient lies upon the affected side to get relief,

6. Vertigo on quickly turning the head with confusion and pressive pain in the orbit. Dullness and giddiness at the beginning of colic accompanied by pressive frontal headache.

7. The patient usually has left sided affections.

8. Desire for bread and beer. Aversion to food and talking.

9. Mind : The patient is EXTREMELY IRRITABLE, impatient; becomes angry or offended on being questioned. He is go irritable that he throws away things out of his hands. Complaints are caused by ANGER AND INDIGNATION. (Staph., Bry.,Cham.).

10. Ailments from : Anger, indignation, mortification, vexation arid exposure to cold,

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Anger with indignation and mortification, vexation, taking cheese, suppressed menses and exposure to cold.

Location: Headache is normally felt in the frontal region. ,

Character of pain: There is pressive and burning pain in the frontal region with soreness of scalp.

Modalities: Headache is worse by stooping, lying on back, anger and indignation. Better by pressure and by bending head forward.

Concomitants: Confusion and pressive pain in orbit; vertigo on quickly turning the head.

Vertigo :

Causation: Anger, indignation, mortification, vexation, suppressed menses and exposure to cold.

Character: There is VERTIGO ON QUICKLY TURNING the HEAD, especially to the left, as if he would fall, with confusion and pressive pain in the orbit. Dullness and giddiness at the beginning of colic.accompained by pressive frontal headache.

Colic :

Causation: Anger with indignation, vexation, taking cheese, exposure to cold and suppressed menses.

Location: Colicky Pain is felt in the whole abdomen.

Character of pain: There is terrible agonising pain in the abdomen, compelling the patient to bend double, pain is violent and gripping type. Abdomen is very sensitive to touch. Pains come in
          paroxysms; become very severe every few minutes. The patient twists and turns to get relief.
  
Modalities: .

Aggravation by eating and drinking, by taking cheese, and by touch.

Amelioration: By bending double, motion, bending forward, hard pressure and discharge of flatus.

Concomitants: Colicky pain may be attended with neuralgia; headache of violent nature with cutting and boring pain in the head.

Dysentery :

Causation: Anger with indignation, vexation and taking cheese.

Character of stool: There is frequent excessive urging to stool, with sensation as if rectum and anus were weakened. Urge for stool is renewed after taking least tood and drink. Stool is foamy, sour,containing mucus and blood, with tenesmus.

Character of pain: There is gripping, crampy, agonising pain in the abdomen, compelling the patient to bend forward for relief. Cramp in abdomen, especially at night, relieved by eructation. Feeling of emptiness in the stomach, tearing pains which come from different parts of the chest and abdomen and concentrate in pit of stomach. Pain in groin and in both sides of abdomen.

Modality: Pain is relieved by pressure, bending forward and eructation..

Concomitants: Painful swelling of haemorrhoids; paralysis of sphincter. Headache, nausea and. vomiting with bitter disgusting taste in the mouth.

Sciatica :

For Left sided sciatica, Colocynth is a royal remedy. There is crampy pain in the hip, as though screwed in a vice. The pain is of. shooting type, like lightning shoeks extends down the whole limb, left hip, left thigh, left knnd into popliteal fossa. Patient wants to lie on affected side apparently to get relief.

Modality: Relief by pressure and lying on affected side.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Anger, indignation, mortification, touch, any attempt to eat and drink, by motion, evening and night.

Amelioration: Bending double, hard pressure, violent exercise, warmth and discharge of flatus.

Relations :

Antidotes to: Causticum.

Antidoted by: Camphor, Coffee, Caust., Staph., Chamomilla.

Complementary to: Merc. Sol.

Compatible: Staphysagria, Chamomilla.

In Colic: Compare with Chamomilla and Mag. Phos.


CHAPTER:85 CONDURANGO

Condor Plant J.P. DINSMORE

CLINICAL

Cancer of stomach. Cancer of Breast. Angular stomatitis. Epithelioma of lips or anus. Fissures. Stricture of Oesophagus. According to the teachings of Hahnemann, Dr. Burnett proved this drug on himself to find out its curative sphere. He regards rhagades at mucocutaneous orifices (Nit. Acid.) and warty excrescences to be most leading indications for it. Dr. Burnett and Dr. Dudgeon both reported a case of cancer of a left breast cured with Condurango, when accompanied by sores or cracks at corners of mouth. Condurango has also cured cancer of the stomach with vomiting of coffee ground masses, loss of appetite, and emaciation. It is also useful in cases of stricture
Asclepiadaceae of oesophagus with burning pains behind sternum, where food seems to stick. It stimulates the digestive functions and thus improves the general health.Author has relieved a case of cancer of left breast in a lady of fifty-nine. Tumour was hard & quiet a big in size and was not improved at all under Hydrastis and Phytolacca. Under Cundurango in tincture doeseit improved miraculously & a lady survived for ten years.


CHAPTER :86 CONIUM MACULATUM

Poison Hemlock HAHNEMANN Umbelliferae

INTRODUCTION
This is yet another important spinal remedy especially affecting the motor nerves, known as the “Balm of Gilead”. Conium maculatum is the remedy for the diseases of people of climacteric age, especially of women, if the symptoms correspond. What Conium is to the glands and capillary system, Aconite is to the heart and arterial system. In many cases, Conium may be regarded as the “Aconite of chronic diseases.” The plant contains the active principle, conine, which is very poisonous. It is notorious as an ingredient of the State poison of ancient Greeks, Socrates was killed by Conium. This poisonous property, when potentised, proves to be an excellent remedy, particularly suited to old men, old maids and old bachelors and it was Hahnemann who first showed how the remedy could be utilised
safely as well as effectively.

CLINICAL

Bladder inflammation. Breast affection, Bronchitis, Cancer, Cataract, Chorea, Cough, Eye affection, Glandular affection, Injury, Jaundice, Liver affection, Menstrual disorders, Paralysis, Testicles, Tumours affection of, Ulcers, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The seat of action of this remedy is centred on the nervous system, particularly motor nerves first and later on the sensory nerves as well; heart, cardiovascular system, glands and female genital organs.

PATHOGENESIS

It powerfully depresses motor nerves leading to paralysis of the muscles of the body as far as voluntary and reflex motions are concerned. It causes paralysis of the motor nerve filaments of the cerebrospinal system. The sensory nerves, spinal cord and brain are affected later on. It depresses the vagus ganglia, resulting in fall of blood pressure and quick pulse, but lowers the temperature. Its effect on glands causes induration and hypertrophy.

CONSTITUTION
Make-up of the body: It is mostly suited to old men and women, old bachelors, during and after climacteric age. Persons having debility and diseases caused by blow or fall. Scrofulous people with rigid muscular fibres and light hair, or persons of lively quick sanguine disposition with marked development of glandular system. Those who lead sedentary life and are easily exhausted and excited and catch cold very readily.

Temperament: Melancholic and irritable temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Easily affected by slightest exposure to cold air.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. The strongest characteristic of Conium maculatum is its peculiar VERTIGO, which is much aggravated by TURNING THE HEAD SIDEWISE or LOOKING AROUND OR TURNING IN BED.
2. Sweats day and night as soon as the patient sleeps or even when closing the eyes (China, Thuja, Cactus rev. of Sambucus). Very offensive sweat.
3. Swelling and induration of glands after contusion or bruise.
4. Cancerous and scrofulous persons with enlarged glands.
5. Intermittent flow of urine: great difficulty in passing urine; urine flows, stops and flows again; from prostatic and uterine affections, or paretic, conditions.
6. Breast sore, hard and painful, especially during the menstrual period.
7. Objects look red, rainbow coloured, double vision, weakness of sight, aversion to light without inflammation, but, with intense photophobia.
8. Desire for warmth especially of the sun, coffee, acid and salty food.
9. Aversion to open air, light, business, study, bread. Craving for salt, coffnd sour things. Desire for warmth of sun.
10. Cough when lying down, aggravated from slightest exposure to cold air.
11. Cold stool and flatulence is a unique characteristic of Coniummac. (Hot stool and flatulence, Sulphur).
12. Ascending type of paralysis reminds of Conium.
13. Mind : The patient is morose and ill humoured and easily angered. He is very much quarrelsome and scolds always even at silly things. The patient cannot and will not      bear contradiction; excitement of any kind causes mental depression.The patient has no inclination to business or to study; very much indifferent and indolent; does not     take interest in anything. Very forgetful; weak memory; is uanble to sustain and mental effort.Cannot bear to be alone; dread of being alone; yet avoids society       (Kali carb., Lyco.).
14. Ailments from : Blow or fall, contusion, sexual excess, sexual abstinence or SUPPRESSED SEXUAL DESIRE: suppressed menses, excitement or over work.


PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache is caused by blow or fall, sexual excess, suppressed menses, excitement or over work, insufficient evacuation.

Location: Lancinating pain especially on the vertex and forehead, in temples; semi-lateral.

Sensation: Sensation as if there is much foreign substance in the head. Sensation as if the brain has gone to sleep.

Character of headache: Stupefying pains in the head; excessive sensibility of brain. Tearing and lancinating pain as if the head were beaten to pieces or the contents of skull would be pressed out. Stitching in head while coughing. Headache with numbness of the brain. Attack of tearing headache which compels the patient to lie down. Obstinate shooting pain in the sinciput; heaviness and squeezing sensation. Apoplexy with paralysis of old people.

Modalities:
 Aggravation: When walking in the open air; from contact, motion and after eating.

 Amelioration: When lying in a recumbent position or while stooping; by external pressure and on closing the eyes.

Concomitants: Nausea and vomiting of mucus. Apoplexy with paralysis of old people.

Vertigo : The strongest characteristic of this drug, from the Homoeopathic point of view, IS ITS PECULIAR VERTIGO which aggravated by TURNING THE HEAD SIDEWISE OR TURNING IN THE BED, especially of old people. Feels as if bed were floating. Vertigo after intoxication even after taking a very small quantity. There is whirling Vertigo on rising and sometimes causes a fall, especially in the morning. Eyes, eye troubles are caused by injury or blow and eye strain; or Using artificial lightly students; sexual excess or suppressed menses and sexual suppression.

Character of eye troubles: There is aversion to light without inflammation of eyes. Ophthalmia with intense photophobia. Weakness and dazzling of the eyes, with giddiness and debility. Weakness of vision. Pupils dilated, the pain is worse at night and terribly aggravated by least ray of light, relieved in a dark room and by pressure.

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Tongue : Tongue is swollen, painful, stiff and paralysed. Consequently, there is difficulty in speech. Bitter taste in the mouth.

Stomach : There is no appetite. Eructations taste sour arid offensive. Terrible nausea with violent vomiting like coffee-ground; acrid heartburn; worse on going to bed, Amelioration from eating, but aggravation a few hours after meals, Cutting pain in the abdomen as from a knife. Severe aching in and around liver. Rumbling with painful tightness of abdomen.

Stool : Cold stool and cold flatulence. Frequent ineffectual urging to stool; passes little at a time. Burning in rectum during stool. Stool is full of undigested matter and painless; passes involuntarily duringsleep.

Urine : There is great difficulty in voiding urine; FLOW INTERMITS, STOPS AND THEN FLOWS AGAIN. Flow stops on straining, from enlarged prostate, uterine affections or paretic conditions. Pain when urinating. Urine 'is-pale with grey or white sediment. 

Menses : conium mac. is an excellent remedy for menstrual disorders, especially in old maids at climacteric age. Menses feeble or suppressed or stopped by taking cold ar putting hands in cold water.

Time: Too late.

Duration: Of short duration.

Quantity: Scanty.

Concomitants: Rashes of small red pimples over the body which cease with the flow (Dulc.). Breasts are sore, hard and painful before and during menses (Lac can., Kali carb.).

Leucorrhoea : Leucorrhoea appears about 10 days after menses (Bor., Bov.). The discharge is very much acrid, milky or bloody profuse, thick and intermits.

Glands : As a result of bruises and injuries, the glands are INDURATED AS OF A STONY HARDNESS AND ALSO ENLARGED especially mammae and testicles, in persons of cancerous
tendency with cutting and stitching pain. This remedy is extensively used for malignant affection of glands.

Respiratory organs :

There is spasmodic paroxysm of cough. Cough usually caused by a dry spot in larynx which constantly irritates and produces dry cough with itching in chest and throat (lod.). Violent spasmodic dry cough, only when lyingdownduring day or night. Cough is worse at night. Only when lying down and during pregnancy.

Heart : Conium is a very good drug for heart troubls and blood pressure. There is violent palpitation with irregular intermittent heart beat, especially of old people and old bachelor; usually after drinking. Pulse irregular in rhythm and unequal in strength; insufficiency of mitral valve.

Sweat : The sweat of a Conium patient is also very peculiar and characteristic. There is profuse sweat day and night, but only when the patient sleeps or even when lying down and closing the eyes (China, Thuja, Cactus-rev, of Sambucus).

General Modalities :

Aggravation: At Night, lying down, during or rising up in the bed, CELIBACY.

Amelioratiog: In dark, from letting the affected limb hang down and by motion.
Relations :

Patients requiring Conium often improve from wine or stimulants, though persons susceptible to Conium cannot take-alcoholic stimulants when in health.

Compare: Arnica, Rhus tox. and Ruta in contusions; Arsenic in cancer, and Calcarea carb. and Psorinum in glandular swellings.

It is followed well by Psorinum in tumours of mammae with threatening malignancy. Antidoted by: Coffea, Dulc., Nit. acid. It antidotes: Merc., Nit. ac.. Sulphur.

CHAPTER:87 CORALLIUM RUBRUM

Red Coral ATTOMYR & MELICHER Gorgoriaceae

INTRODUCTION

Red coral, the product of coralligene Zoophyte,contains carbonate of lime, Oxide of iron, gelatin and other elements. In old physic it was considered to have “strengthening properties” and to be astringent, sudorific, diuretic and absorbent.

CLINICAL

Catarrh. Eruptions. Post nasal catarrh. Cough-whooping, hysterical & other types of eough.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) “Minute gun cough” during the day and whooping cough at night.
2) Inspired air feels cold (Ars., Aesc., Brom.)
3) “Whooping cough or any other kind of cough when the attack comes on with a very rapid cough and the attack follows so closely as to almost run into each other’— Guernsey.
4) Violent paroxysm of cough with bleeding from mouth & nose.
5) Profuse secretion of mucus through the posterior nares obliging one to hawk frequently. (Nat. Garb.)
6) “Continuous hysterical cough”—Author has found it useful after Ignatia has failed.
7) Feels suffocated and greatly exhausted after whooping cough.
8) Skin : Red Flat ulcers. Coral-colored, then dark red spots, changing to copper colored spots. Psoriasis of palms & soles.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory Symptoms :

Nose : Post nasal catarrh. Profuse secretion of mucus dropping through posterior nares. Dry coryza; nose stopped up and ulcerated. Painful ulcers in nostrils. Odors of smoke, onions etc. *

Throat: Throat very sensitive, especially to air. Hawking of profuse mucus.

Chest: Dry spasmodic suffocative cough ; very rapid cough, short, barking. Cough with great sensitiveness of air passages. Feel cold on deep inspiration. Continuous hysterical cough. Patient feels suffocated and greatly exhausted after whooping cough. “Minute gun cough” during the day and whooping cough at night. Violent paroxysm of cough with bleeding from mouth & nose.

Relation :
Complementary : Sulph.
Compare : Bell., Dros., MephiU Caust.

CRATAEGUS
Hawthorn DR. JENNINGS Rosaceac

CLINICAL
Angina pectoris. Heart- affection of. Crataegus was introduced into medicine as a heart remedy by Dr. Greene of Ennis, Ireland. Crataegus is useful in those desperate cases of heart affections such as valvular deficien-cies of hypertrophy where dyspnoea and  dropsy have super-vened, and the pulse is gradually growing weak and rapid
where physicians have lost heart.There is extreme dyspnoea on least exertion without much increase of pulse. Pain in region of. heart and under left clavicle. Heart dilated ; first sound weak— pulse acceler-ated, irregular, feeble intermittent. There may be extreme weakness,general anasarca, insomnia, anaemia, cutaneous chilliness with heart disease.

MODALITIES

Aggravation—In warm room, exertion or excitement. Amelioration—Fresh air, quiet and rest.

TONICS
Heart Tonic—Crataegus.
Lung Tonic—Aspidosperma.
Oldage Tonic—Avena Sativa.
Children Tonic & Appetizer—China, Hydrastis, Chelido-
nium, Gentiana Lutea.
Sexual Tonie—Damiana.

CHAPTER: 88 Salfron STAPF Tridaceae

INTRODUCTION

One of the richest and very useful remedy of the Vegetable kingdom belonging to the family Jridaceae, is Crocus sativus, commonly named as saffron. Saffron is used frequently as a Condiment. It bears an individual characteristic, being brick-red in colour which, on proving produces haemorrhages of DARKISH RED hue. Of course, brightness may also be an occasional feature. VISCIDITY AND STRINGINESS are the other two characteristics of its blood picture.

CLINICAL

Brain affection, Chorea, Eye affection, Epistaxis, Headache, Haemorrhage, Heart troubles, Hysteria, Laughter, Lachrymotion, Menstrual disorders, Nose affection, Opthalmia, Threatened abortion, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts especially upon the female genital organs, but eyes, chest and abdomen may also be affected in rare instances. Brain and mind too are important centres for its action.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes chorea and hysteria. Acting on female genital organs; it causes abortion and produces HAEMORRHAGE, THE BLOOD BEING DARK, STRINGY AND CLOTTED.

CONSTITUTION

There is no particular constitution of the patient as such. The patient is however,having syphilitic background, HAEMORRHAGIC DIATHESIS and of nervous and hysterical temperament.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Frequent and extreme changes in sensation; sudden, from the greatest hilarity to the deepest despondency. (Ign., Nux mos., Platina) anger with violence rapidly followed by repentance, laughter quickly succeeded by tears.
2. Haemorrhage from any and every orifice of the body which IS DARK, VISCID, CLOTTED, IN LONG BLACK STRINGS, HANGING FROM THE BLEEDING SURFACE.
3. Sensation as something alive were moving in the stomach, abdomen, uterus, arms or other parts of the chest or body (Sabina, Thuja, Sulphur). This may be definite sensation or it may be a hallucination or a fixed idea.
4. Spasmodic contraction and twitchings of single sets of muscles (Agaricus, Ign., Zincum met. Aconite).

5. Mind : Crocus sativus patient shows very striking and rare mental symptoms
which are as follows : There is frequent and extreme change in sensation: sudden, from the greatest hilarity to the deepest despondency, (Ign., Nux mos., Platina). The patient is excessively happy, affectionate; wants to kiss every body, but the very next moment she is in rage; anger with violence, rapidly followed by repentance. Laughter quickly followed by tears. Chorea and hysteria with great hilarity; singing and dancing alternating with melancholy and rage. There is a very peculiar and important sensation found in Crocus ie. as if something alive were moving in the abdomen, chest, etc. It may be either a real sensation or a hallucination. It is equally serviceable in PHANTOM PREGNANCY where the sensation of movement in the pelvis, real or imaginary, leads to a definite
conviction of pregnancy.

PARTICULARS
Eyes:
Sensation in the eyes as if the room were filled with smoke, as if he had been violently weeping. A constant desire to wink and wipe the eyes with a feeling as though a film of mucus were over the eyes. The vision seems dim as though the whole room were full of smoke or as if cold wind is blowing across the eyes.

Lachrymation on reading. Tears rushes out from the dim eyes as soon as he begins to read. The lachrymation occurs only when the patient is in the room and not when he is in the open air. There is itching in the eyelids, pain as from excoriation and sensation of burning in the eyes and eyelids, especially when closing them or while reading.

Nose :
Epistaxis only from one nostril at a time. Nose bleeds. The character of blood is BLACK, VISCID,CLOTTED, FORMING INTO LONG, BLACK STRINGS, HANGING FROM THE NOSE, every drop can be turned into a thread with cold sweat in large drops on forehead.

Female genital organs :

Menses. Crocus is suited for DYSMENORRHOEA AND METRORRHAGIA.

Time: Too early.

Quantity: Too profuse,

Character of blood: Dark, stringy, viscid, clotted, forming long black strings, hangs from the

bleeding surface: rush of blood to genitals.

Concomitants: Headache before, DURING AND AFTER MENSES; during two or three days of accustomed menstrual flow.

Modality: Worse from least motion.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: From lying down, hot weather, warm room in morning before breakfast.
Amelioration: In the open air.
Relations :
Antidoted by: Aeon., Opium, Belladonna.
Compare: Ipecac., Platina, Sabina.

CHAPTER: 89 CROTALUS HORRIDUS

Poison of Rattle Snake HERING Crotalidae

INTRODUCTION

The first regular proving of this drug was made by Hering and by others under his personal direction. It is prepared from the venom of the deadly Rattle Snake of North
America. Dr. Tyler remarks to“Homoeopathic specifics” in her Drug Picture.There are drugs whose malignant effects on human body present an almost perfect
picture of some diseases and can be used asspecific for that particular symptom syndrome; examples being: Crotalus horridus and Black Water Fever. Arsenic and Ptomaine poisoning, Mere. cor. and Dysentery. Belladonna and Scarlet Fever. Even Master Hahnemann has said, “Where such correspondence occurs we have specifics.” Hence it is seen that Crotalus horridus is in intimate relation with the signs and symptoms of blood poisoning manifesting AS BLACK WATER FEVER, with characteristic haemorrhages here and there.

CLINICAL

Apoplexy, Boils, Cancer, Carbuncles, Convulsion, Diarrhoea, Diphtheria, Delirium, Dyspepsia, Ecchymosis, Epilepsy, Eye effection, Erysipelas, Fever, Haemorrhoids,
Headache, Heart affection, Jaundice, Liver affections, Lung trouble, Meningitis, Menstrual disorders, Skin affection, Tongue affection, Ulcers, Vomiting, Whooping cough,
etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts primarily upon cerebrospinal nerve centres and secondarily upon the fibrin of blood and liver.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes DECOMPOSITION OF BLOOD AND PRODUCES HAEMORRHAGE FROM ALL ORIFICES OF THE BODY e.g. eyes, ears, nose, mouth, throat and urethra.

It also acts upon cerebro-spinal nerve centres producing rapid and direct depressing influence on sensorium and medulla oblongata, deranging thereby both circulation and
nutrition. Acting on the liver it causes malignant jaundice and sets in oedematous swelling of the body and profoundly affects the organs of vision even to the extent of
destroying their functions completely.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Especially indicated in strumous, debilitated, broken down constitution, particularly in drunkards with tendency to carbuncles or blood boils.

Temperament: choleric temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Affected by heat, wants open air.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: HAEMORRHAGIC DIATHESIS.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Haemorrhagic diathesis: blood flows from eyes, ears, nose and every orifice of the body and even pores of the skin; blood being fluid, dark, non-coagulable and     offensive.
. Malignant jaundice, haematic rather than hepatic.
. Mostly affects right side of the body.
. Great prostration of vital force.
. Bad effects of vaccination, especially blood poisoning as a result.
. There is general aggravation in the morning on waking or aggravation wakes the patient up at night.
. Tongue fiery red; smooth: and polished (Pyr., Fer. met., Apis), intensely swollen, difficulty in swallowing.
. Purpura haemorrhagica: sudden bleeding from all orifice skin, nails, gums, etc.
. Low spetic condition with blood decomposition.
. Black, coffee-ground and offensive stool.
. There is desire for stimulants and aversion to meat.

. Mind : The mental symptoms are well worth examining in this drug. There is low forms of delirium; great loquacity, wants to talk all the time with desire to escape
  from the bed. Delirium with langour, drowsiness, stuper. All the symptoms are more during sleep.

. Aliments from : Fright, sun, alcohol, foul water, and vaccination.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
There is severe sick-headache

Location: Right sided headache.

Sensation: Head feels too large, as if it would burst.

Character of headache: Dull, heavy, throbbing, occipital headache. The whole head is in a state of congestion. The headache is so severe in the back of head that it is 
impossible to raise it from the pillow, Headache extends into the eyes; bilious headache.

Modalities: Aggravation: During sleep; the longer he sleeps the more severe is the headache.

Throat :
In malignant diphtheria and scarlatina, this remedy is very useful.

Location: Right sided throat affection.


Sensation: There is sense of constriction.

Look of the throat: Oedematous and gangrenous look of fauces or tonsils. Fauces look swollen, dark red with much prostration. The patient can swallow liquid only.

Modality: Aggravation from empty swallowing.

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :
Abdomen : Violent bilious vomiting, stomach is unable to retain any food. Vomiting of food, vomiting of blood, dark, coffee-ground vomiting. Constant nausea and vomiting, 
every month after menstruation. In cancer of stomach, with vomiting of blood, dark coffee-ground vomiting. There is intolerance of clothing around the stomach. Cannot lie 
orrright side.

Stool : Ulceration of bowels; haemorrhage from the bowels Diarrhoea from noxious effluvia, of septic origin, from foul water and food.

Character of stool: Black, thin, offensive, like coffee-ground there is intestinal haemorrhage.Blood oozes from rectum when standing on-walking. The character of blood is 
DARK, fluid and non- coagulable (Lachesis).

Liver : In malignant jaundice, haematic rather than hepatic. Pain in the region of liver with yellow colour of the face and conjunctiva. The abdomen is distended, hot and tender with constant nausea and vomiting, violent vomiting of food. Stomach is unable to retain anything. Billious vomiting. Intolerance of clothing around the stomach with faintness and sinking at stomach. Desire for simulants and aversion to meat.

Female Genital Organs :

Menses : This remedy is suited to dysmenorrhoea and prolonged menorrhagia. There is prolonged menses with copious dark, liquid blood which oozes out all the time. There is severe pain extending down to thighs; painful drawing in uterine ligament as though uterus would drop out. Vicarious menstruation, nose-bleed instead of menses.

Skin : Causation: Dissecting wounds, insect stings and bad effects of vaccination. There is great tendency to carbuncles and blood boils, pustular eruption, post vaccination eruptions, and effects of vaccination. Blood boils and eruptions are surrounded by purplish mottled skin and oedema. Great sensitiveness of skin of right half of the body. There is swelling and dis-colouration of whole body. Yellow colour of skin. There is purpura haemorrhagica. Blood comes out from all the orifices, skin, nails, etc., with bloody sweat. Cold and dry skin. Wants open air.

Haemorrhage :

In malignant diseases of uterus: Great tendency of haemorrhage. The blood discharge is DARK, FLUID, DECOMPOSED AND NON COAGULABLE. The blood loses all power of coagulation; hence clots are not usually detected in the haemorrhage (Lach., Naja coagulates the blood with long strings). In intestinal haemorrhage when occurring in typical septic or zymotic diseases where the blood is dark, fluid and offensive, Crotalus is a wonderful remedy. There is haemorrhagic diathesis. The blood flows from all the orifices of the body e.g. ear, nose, eyes, and even from the pores of skinr In blood poisoning, pulse can scarcely be felt. Completely collasped. Condition with great prostration of vital force and blood sweat. There may also be PURPURA HAEMORRHAGICA, coming suddenly from all the orifices e.g. skin, nails, gums, etc. During haemorrhage the skin becomes cold and dry. The patient wants fanning. Usually right side is more affected.

Fever :

In low septic typhoid or malarial fevers or in zymotic diseases. There is low state of vitality. The septic condition, the history of septic absorption with tremendous weakness, great prostration of vital force, petechial eruption and haemorrhage are clear indications of this drug. The skin is yellow and the sweatstains linen red, due to presence of blood in sweat. Putrescence is found everywhere.

The tongue is fiery red, smooth and polished, intensely swollen. The pulse is scarcely felt. Weak and slow pulse.
Comparison between Crotalus and Lachesis. Similarities:

1. Both are potentised from snake poison.
2. Both are haemorrhagic remedies.
3. Both are worse from sleep and sleeps into aggravation. _
4. Both are intolerant of pressure and tight clothing.
5. Both have loquacity.
6. Both have bluenesss of parts.
7. Both have bloody sweat.
8. Both have yellowness and jaundiced look of the skin.
9. Both want fanning.

Distinctions:
1. Crotalus affects right side more, Lachesis left.
2. Crotalus skin is cold and dry, but Lachesis skin is cold and clammy.
3. Crotalus has more haemorrhage than Lachesis.
4. Lachesis has more intense sensitivity to touch, pressure and constriction.
5. Crotalus has more specific effects on liver than Lachesis.
6. Lachesis is more suited to patients of climacteric age than Crotalus.
7. Malignant jaundice is more marked in Crotalus than in Lachesis.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Lying on right side, open air, evening, morning and and after sleep.

Amelioration: By rest and fanning.

Relations :

Antidoted by: Lahesis.

Compare: Lachesis, Pyrogen.

CHAPTER: 90 CROTON TIGLIUM

Croton Oil Seeds HENCKE Euphorbiaceae

INTRODUCTION

Croton tig. is a very valuable remedy prepared from croton oil seed, having a limited range of action in therapeutic sphere. Mostly it is a remedy for the relief of acute troubles. Nevertheless, no other drug in Hemoeopathic Materia Medica is able to replace it for its peculiar affinity to mucous membrane of gastro- intestinal tract and skin ‘and thus the indispensability of this remedy has been well established.

CLINICAL

Cholera, Colds, Cough, Diarrhoea, Breast affection, Ear affection, Eczema, Skin affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts especially on mucous membrane of gastro-intestinal tract and skin.
Respiratory organs are also within the domain of action of this remedy.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces both irritation and inflammation of skin, resulting in formation of vesicles and mucus discharge. Burning in oesophagus i is one of its metastatic pathological
actions. It also causes congestion of gastro-intestinal tract, copious watery stool and peritonitis. Hyperaemia of the glandular system too is within its range of action.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Profuse watery diarrhoea “coming out like a shot” as soon as the patient eats and drinks, followed by great prostration. The evacuation is yellowish or yellowish green.
2. On the skin Croton produces ERYTHEMA, ERYSIPELAS, ECZEMA, HERPES, PUSTULES, etc. There is intense itching of the skin but the patient cannot bear to
   scratch very hard as it hurts; a very slight scratch or a mere rub suffice to allay the itching.
3. Touch pressure and motion aggravate, Aggravation at night and summer.
4. Suffocating cough as soon as the head touches the pillow (Hyos., Drosera, Rumex, Belladonna, Conium).
5 Drawing pain through the chest from nipple to scapula of the same side when child nurses (Nipple to all over body—Phytolacca; nipple to uterus—Puls., Silicea).
6. Aggravation from eating and drinking and from every movement, followed by great Prostration.
7. For skin eruptions such as erythema, erysipelas, eczema, herpes, pustules,throughout the body which itch exceedingly, but very much sensitive to touch, Croton tig. is infaillible.

PARTICULARS

Diarrhoea :
Causation: Fron fruits, sweet-meat and hot summer weather.
During stool: Constant urging to stool, followed by SUDDEN EVACUATION. The bowels are moved as if by “SPASMODIC JERKS, COMING OUT LIKE A SHOT”.

Character of stool: Gushing of thin, yellow, watery stool, profuse in quantity, is the striking feature of Croton tig.
Concomitants: With stool, the stomach is greatly distended and very much sensitive to touch with much gurgling in bowels.

Modality: Aggravation from eating, drinking or even while eating and summer.

Cough :Cough especially at night, often compelling the patient to rise from a sound sleep.

Character of cough: Violent spasmodic with dyspnoea, choking, more at night, obliging the patient to sit up. Sensitive to deep breathing. Extreme irritation of air passage, so that the inhalation of air brings on cough.

Modality: Cough aggravated from lying down, as soon as the head touches the pillow at night.

Breast :

There is drawing pain through the chest from breast to scapula of the same side, every time the child nurses. (Pain extends from nipple all over—Phytolacca; from nipple to uterus—Puls., Silicea)

Skin :

Eczema all over the body, especially of scalp and genital organs, either-purely vesicular or pustular. The vesicles dry up and are followed by red, raw, inflamed surface.
Intense itching of skin, but it is so tender that the patient is unable to scratch, instead rubs gently to get relief. There is also severe itching on genitals in both sexes which may be vesicular or pustular but very much sensitive and sore but gentle rubbing gives relief and comfort.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: Diarrhoea by every motion, from eating and drinking, even while eating the least food and drink.

Relations :
Compare: Kali phos.
Antidoes: Rhus tox.
Antidoted by: Antim. tart.

CHAPTER: 91 CUPRUM METALLICUM

Metallic Copper HAHNEMANN Cu The Element

INTRODUCTION

Metallic copper, an insoluble substance when jt is pure, is made soluble by means of trituration. It was Master. Hahnemann who solved this problem of using insoluble substance, in the field of therapeutics. This medicine was first introduced by him as one of the weapons for the then prevailing cholera epidemic. By the members of the orthodox school, copper is used as copper sulphate for therapeutic purposes, especially for external application. They did not dare to use it internally because of its chemically poisonous effect, but Homoeopathy has made it useful through the process of trituration.

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris, Asthma, Cholera, Chorea, Convulsion, Cough, Cramps, Croup, Cyanosis, Dyspnoea, Epilepsy Gastric disorders, Gout, Throat affection, Measles,
Meningitis, Neuralgia, Paralysis, Spasm, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Cuprum met. acts prominently upon the alimentary canal and profoundly influences the nervous system and various nerve centres.

PATHOGENESIS

Cuprum met. causes gastro-intestinal inflammation, colic, diarrhoea and vomiting. Acting on the nerve centres it gives rise to SPASMODIC AFFECTIONS CRAMPS,
paralysis, convulsions, beginning in fingers and toes; violent contractive and intermitting pain with tonic and clonic spasm etc.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: “It is suited to fair haired people and the carbo-nitrogenoid constitution, women who have borne many children” (Clarke).
Relation with heat and cold: Symptoms are aggravated from cold air.

Miasm: It is an anti-psoric remedy WORKING FROM WITHIN OUTWARDS.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It ranks with most important medicines for troubles arising from the “STRIKING INWARD” of diseases of failure of eruptions or discharges to come out or
repercussed eruptions resulting in brain affections, spasm, convulsions, diarrhoea, vomiting, etc.
2. Spasmodic affections, cramps, convulsions, beginning in fingers and toes and spreading over the entire body.
3. Clonic and tonic spasms: Convulsions and epileptic attacks.
4, Spasm and cramps, convulsions cough and pain are disposed to appear periodically and in groups.
5. A strong sweetish metallic coppery taste in the mouth with flow of saliva; constant protrusion and retraction of tongue like that of a snake (Lach).
6. When drinking, the fluid descends with a gurgling sound (Arn., Thuja).
7. Cholera morbus or Asiatic cholera with cramps in abdomen and calf muscles.
8. Complaints begin on the left side.
9. Cough in thrttacks successively (Stannum), cough is relieved by drinking cold water (Causticum).
10. Mental and physical exhaustion from over-exertion of mind and loss of sleep (Cocculus, Nux vom.).
11. Colic, vomiting, cough (hiccough) and spasm, relieved by drinking cold water; aggravated in the evening and at night; relieved by being mesmerised.
12. Ailments from : Fright, suppressed discharge, repercussed eruptions.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory Symptoms :

Cough : Cuprum rnet. is a favourite remedy in whooping cough. The attacks are SPASMODIC in nature.

Sensation: Cough with a gurgling sound in the throat as if water is being poured out of a boitle.
 
Character of cough: The cough is so long lasting and suffocative that the patient tums entirely breathless, blue and rigid. While coughing, the face becomes, livid or blue, The finger nails become discoloured,.the eyes are turned up and the patient coughs until he loses breath. There is also rattling in the chest. Whenever the respiratory organs are affected, there is spasmodic breathing and dyspnoea; more the dyspnoea, more likely is it that the thumbs will be clenched and the fingers cramped. Cough in three paroxysms successively, the patient is unable to speak; becomes breathless; blue faced, rigid and stiff, cataleptic spasm with each paroxysm. At the end of cough, he vomits out all the food taken plus a little quantity of tough gelatinous mucus. Modality: Worse at 3 a.m. Better by drinking cold water (Causticum).

Cholera :
In cholera morbus or Asiatic cholera, Cuprum met. is an excellent remedy. Its application is generallyconfined to the later part of the second stage and the early part of the third stage of the disease. When the CRAMP STARTS AND COLLAPSE BEGINS TO APPEAR, Cuprum met. is well indicated.

Character of stool and vomitus: There is gushing of profuse watery stool with copious vomiting.Due to the profuse discharge, the stomach and bowels are emptied of their contents.

Look of the face: During cholera, there is collasped condition, cyanosis; the face becomes blue, lips and nails turn blue, cold and mottled.

Cramps: During cholera, there is cramp in the extremities, pain in the soles and calves with great weariness of limbs. There is clonic spasm, beginning in the fingers and toes and spreading over the entire
body. Flexor type of cramps (rev. Secale cor.),

Tongue: Constant protrusion ahd retraction of the tongue like a snake.

Sweat: There is cold and clammy sweat over the entire body. There are three remedies which tend to collaspe and death. These are Cuprum, Camphor and Veratrum. These three drugs can be differentiated as follows: Cuprum for the cases of convulsive character. Camphor in cases characterised by extreme coldness and more or less dryness, and the main feature of Veratrum is that the sweat, vomiting and purging are “TOO MUCH” profuse and copious. Cuprum met. has twitching, shivering, trembling; also tonic contraction, so that the hands are closed violently. In this condition, the thumbs are first affected. They are drawn into the palms and then the fingers close down with GREAT violence. FLEXOR TYPE OF CRAMPS are usually noticed in Cuprum met. (Extensor type — Secale cor.). Tonic contraction; the limbs are drawn up with great violence.Epilepsy :

Causation: From a fall or blow upon the head, from getting wet, and suppressed exanthemata.

Aura begins in lower extremities especially in knnd proceeds upwards.

There is, generally great restlessness between the attacks either filling up the entire interval or only a part of it. During the epileptic spasm, the face becomes red and respiration is hurried and noisy, and arms and legs jerk, especially the left arm is convulsively jerked as if by electric shock. The first attack generally
comes during first sleep at night (Lahchesis).

Modality: Worse at night, during new and full moon.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: At night, from getting wet, from vomiting, contact, during new and full moon.

Amelioration: Drinking cold water.

Relations :

Complementary to: Calcarea carb,

It is antidoted by: Sugar mixed with milk and given freely, Hepar, Bell., Cham., Con., Dulc., Ipecac., Nux vom. It antidotes: Aur., Merc., Op.

CHAPTER : 92 CYCLAMEN EUROPAEUM

Sowbread PROVER : HAHNEMANN Primulaceae

INTRODUCTION
Cyclamen has a traditional reputation as a remedy for affections of the uterus and appendages. The later provings have demonstrated the correctness of this. It is in many
ways analogous to Pulsatilla, from which it differs mainly in having no better from open air ; and in not having thirstlessness as so frequent an accompaniment of other conditions.

CLINICAL
Acne. Anaemia. Chlorosis. Dyspepsia. Eyes affections. Headache. Heel pain. Menstrual disorder. Mental. Pruritus. Rheumatism.

SPHERE OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

It acts upon cerebro-spinal system affecting sensorium, eyes, gastrointestinal canal and more especially female sexual system.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up—Best adapted to blonde leuco-phlegmatic who are pale and anaemic. Temperament: Phlegmatic and irritable temperament. Heat cold relation :
Chilly patient. Miasm : Psoric and sycotic miasms are in the back ground.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Aversion to open air : The patient dreads open air (coryza and cough relief in open air.

2) Deranged Menses in pale, chlorotic women : attended with headache, vertigo and dim vision.

3) Weeping disposition : The patient is mentally sad, irrit-able, peevish, morose and desires to be alone.

4) Thirstlessness : There is no thirst all day but it occurs in the evening during fever.

5) (a) Desire: For lemonade. (Bell., Nit. Acid., Pills., Sabina., Sec-Cor,) Inedible things (Cale, Os., Cina., Cicuta., Psorinum etc.)

(b) Aversion : To fat, meat, bread & butter. Ordinary food and beer. Pork disagrees.

(c) Appetite : Satiety after a few mouthfuls (Lye.) and then he loathes food which causes nausea,

(d) Taste : Saliva and all food taste salty.

6) Flickering before eyes, as of various colours, fiery sparks, glittering needles, visions of smoke or fog, with headache or while getting up from the bed in the morning.

7) Pains : Pressive, drawing or tearing of parts where the bones are least covered ; as tibia, backs of hands etc. (Sang., Can., Rhus Ven.)

8) Menses : Too early, too profuse, black & clotted better during flow (Lach., Zinc.)

9) Sleep : Late sleep in the evening, but wakes up early, too tired and sleepy. Disturbed by anxious and frightful dreams.

10) Burning sore pain in heels, when sitting, standing or walking in open air (Agar.,Caust, Val., Phyt.)


11) Mind : Like Pulsatilla the mental conditions of Cyclamen are also worth mentioning. The patient is irritable, peevish, morose, and ill-humored ; there may
be great sadness with weeping disposition. She desires to be alone and dislikes company.Changeability of mental symptoms is the characteristic feature of this remedy. Alternations of moods such as sadness and cheerfulness, love of labour and indolence; joyous feeling & irritability. Memory alternately quick and weak etc.
Mental conditions arise from suppressed grief and terrors of conscience ; neglect of duty or commission of bad act. Mental symptoms are better during profuse menstrual flow.

12) Ailments from : Suppressed grief, neglect of duty, commission of bad act, suppressed menses, fats, pork, coffee, overheating, overexertion, complaints after wearing.

13) Headache : Causation—Headache from disordered stomach, fatty diet & stopping.

Location— One sided especially in forehead & temples.

Sensation : As if brain were enveloped in a cloth ; as if he had a cap on a scalp.

Character : Boring, darting, pressing & bursting headache on rising in the morning. 

Modalities-Aggravation by lying on painful side, by motion in open air. Amelioration by vomiting, cold appli-cation.

Concomitants : In anaemic patients with flickering before eyes, dim vision. Vertigo as if objects turn in circle when walking in open air and better in a room.

14) Gastrointestinal tract:
Mouth : Saliva increased and salty taste. Tongue white or yellowish. Taste is lost; bad, putrid feeling ; all food taste salty, burning & dryness in the throat and lips
with thirstlessness.

Stomach Causations : Eating fatty food, pork, coffee, overheating.

Nausea : Satiety after a few mouthfuls and then he loathes food which causes nausea in throat and palate.

Vomiting : Of watery mucus, in the morning after eating.



Eructations : Like hiccough worse after taking fatty food. Aching in the stomach, burning in oesophagus and colicky pain in abdomen ; all better by walking about,
Sensation of weight in stomach after eating. The whole abdomen is tender with stitching pains in stomach, liver & abdomen.

Diarrhoea : After coffee, fatty diet. Stool is watery, forceful, brownish, yellow & odourless.

Menses :

Causation : Suppressed from over exertion or being over heated (Getting wet-Puls.)
Time : Too early.
Duration : Prolonged.
Quantity : Profuse.

Character : Black, membranous, clotted, flowless when moving about.

Concomitant :

During menses : labour like pains from back to pubes ; mental symptoms are better.
(b) After menses : swelling of breast with milk secretion.
(c) In those ladies who are blonde, pale and chlorotic.

Modalities-

Menses aggravate while sitting and lying, at night and relieved while walking.
16) Comparison between Cyclamen and Pulsatilla.

Similarities :
(1) Both are predominantly womens’ remedies.
(2) Both are suited to blondes,—pale and anaemic.
(3) Both are thirstless.
(4) Both are weepy and dislike company.
(5) Both present changeability of mental symptoms.
(6) Both desire lemonades and to both pork disagrees.
(7) Both are. late sleepers.

Dissimilarites :

Cyclamen Pulsatilla
1) Aversion to open air which aggravates 1) Craves open air which relieves
2) Mentally peevish, irritable & morose. 2) Mild, gentle, timid, yielding disposition
3) Aggravation from cold and relieved 3) Relief from cold and aggravation
by warmth in general. from warmth,
4) Menses — Too early, too profuse black 4) Menses - Too late, pale & scantly. and clotted.
5. Better during flow. 5) Worse during flow.
6. Secretions — neither thick, nor bland 6) Secretion — Thick, bland & nor yellowish-green yellowish-green
General modalities :
Aggravation — Open air, cold air, cold bathing, by rest, sitting, standing, at night, before menses.
Amelioration — During menstrual flow by moving about, rubbing parts. In warm room, indoors, after consuming lemonade.
Relations :
Antidotes : Camphor, Coffea, Pulsatilla.
Compare : China, Ferrum & Puls. in chlorosis and anaemic affections.
 

CHAPTER: 93 DIGITALIS PURPUREA


Foxglove HAHNEMANN Scrophulariaceae


INTRODUCTION

This is another excellent remedy from the vegetable kingdom, usually indicated in heart diseases. This is a wild plant grown best in siliceous soil in bushy grounds and
waste places of Europe. The fresh leaves from this uncultivated plant are gathered, and from this the mother tincture is prepared and subsequent potencies are made.

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris, Asthma,  Bright’s disease, Cyanosis, Delirium, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Headache, Heart affection, Lung troubles, Urinary troubles, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its main seat of action is heart and circulation, gastro-intestinal tract and uro-genital organs.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action through cardiac peripheral end of vagus inhibits the activity of heart,resulting in SLOW HEART BEAT; prolonged diastole and rise of blood pressure. It also
causes suppression of urine producing oedema. It is also capable of irritating gastro- intestinal tract, producing vomiting and diarrhoea.

CONSTITUTION
There is no particular constitution or make-up of the body as such. However, the patient is light-haried scrofulous; children of fair complexion and people of climacfric age having weak heart, but without valvular complicaions. Blueness of the skin, with cyanosis of eye-lids, lips, tongue and nails. Relation with heat and cold; Chilly patient with great sensitiveness to cold air and cold weather; cold food and drink which aggravate.

Miasm: Psora and Sycosis are in the background,

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis,

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Prostration from slight exertion.
2. Sensation as if the heart would stop beating if she moved (rev-Gels.).
3. Motion aggravates most of its complaints.
4. Slow and weak, irregular, intermittent pulse; intermitting every 3rd, 5thand 7th beat.
5, Enlarged, sore and painful liver.
6. White and pasty stool.
7. Blueness of the skin, with cyanosis of face, eyelids, lips, tongue and nails, face is cold and pale and is covered with cold sweat.
8. Great weakness and deadly sinking in epigastrium with nausea and vomiting from smell of food; clean tongue and great thirst.
9. Respiration is very difficult and he often takes deep breath.
10. Mind : There is great anxiety and apprehension. The patient is very much despondent and fearful. Music is unbearable. It aggravates all troubles.
The patient is very much forgetful. His memory is weak and thinking is difficult.
11. Ailments from : Alcohol, high living, sexual excess and tobacco.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Alcohol, tobacco, and sexual excess.

Location: Forehead and temples.

Sensation: Sudden cracking sensation in the head.

Character; Throbbing headache in the forehead, with stitches in forehead and temples.

Modalities: Aggravated by sitting erect, motion, music, excitement and eating.

Amelioration by pressrue, frequent profuse micturition, When the stomach is empty and in open air.

Concomitants: Vertigo with anxiety and faintness.

Heart :

Causation: Heart troubles are caused by alcohol, sexual excess, tobacco and/or high living.

Sensation: Sudden sensation as if the heart would stop beating if the patient moved (Fears that unless constantly on the move, the heart would cease beating—Gels.).

Character: Weak heart without any valvular complications. There is uneasiness in the region of the heart and precordium. IRREGULAR INTERMITTENT PULSE, generally occurring at climacteric age, aggravated by least motion, Heart's action is feeble. Heart beats more frequently, but intermits; sometimes irregular, VERY SLOW AND WEAK, INTERMITTING EVERY 3RD, 5TH AND 7TH BEAT. Frightful stiches in region of heart, coming on every fifteen minutes, lasting only five or six seconds each time (Angina pectoris).

Concomitants: Sudden flush of heat followed by nervous weakness. There is feeling or faintness or sinking at the stomach with i exhaustion, EXTREME PROSTRATION; feels as if he were dying. There is great weakness of the chest; cannot bear to talk. Face is pale, of death like appearance and bluish-red with cyanosed skin, eyelids, lips and tongue. Venis on the lids, ears, lips and tongue are distended. Respiration is irregualr and difficult with deep sighing. Fatal syncope may occur when being raised to upright position. Dropsical condition of the body, when there are organic affection of the heart.

Kidney :

For all kidney diseases, brought on or aggravated by alcoholism, sexual excess or tobacco, Digitalis is an excellent remedy and the indications are as follows:

There is post-scarlatina dropsy, with suppressed urine. Dropsy of both internal and external parts.

There is frequent urging to urinate with a very small quantity passing at a time giving no relief whatsoever.

Urine is scanty, thick and turbid. Feeling of fulness of bladder continues even after urinating. Strangury and frequent urging to urinate. Urethra inflamed. Burning in 
urethra with purulent, thick and yellowish discharge.

Stool :

There is violent diarrhoea, especially of drunkards. The stool is very light, ash-coloured, delayed. chalky, almost white; involuntary and pipe-stem stool.

Geneal Modalities :

Aggravation: When sitting, especially when sitting erect, motion, Least motion aggravates palpitation as well as causes palpitation, aggravation at night.

Amelioration: Symptoms are relieved when stomach is empty.

Relations :
Cinchona antidotes the direct action of Digitalis but increases the anxeity. 

Antidoted by; Camphor.

CHAPTER : 94 DIOSCOREA VILLOSA

Fr namcamietees duane aac amma menace iS aaa
Wild Yam BURT Dioscoreaceae

INTRODUCTION

As a remedy for many kinds of pain, especially colic, and in severe, painful affections of abdominal and pelvic viscera, Dioscorea ranks with the polychrests of the Materia Medica. The pains of Dioscorea are neuralgic in character. It affects the ganglionic nervous system particularly of the umbilical region, thereby producing symptoms simulating an attack of bilious colic. Dr. Burt/ who made a heroic proving of this remedy, says—The grand sphere for the use of Dioscorea is among neuroses of the bowels and stomach; where the coeliac and umbilical plexuses are in a state of great hyperaesthesia, (the pain and spasm being unbearable. So whatever may be its action) It is one of the leading remedies for various kinds of colic, such as biliary, intestinal, flatulent, menstrual or renal when symptoms agree.

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris. Colic : Biliary, Intestinal, Renal, Flatulent, Menstrual, Gastralgia. Paronychia. Sciatica. Spermatorrhoea. Whitlow.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

It chiefly acts on gastroin-testinal tract, liver, genito urinary organs and nervous system.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Colic pains worse from bending forward and while lying; better on standing erect or bending backwards (Rev.of Col.)
2) Violent twisting colic, occurring in regular paroxysms, as if intestines were grasped and twisted by a powerful hand. There is gripping pains in abdomen about umbilicus.
3) Persons of feeble digestive powers, often subject to vio-lent colic; tea drinkers with much flatulence after meals or after eating.
4) Pains radiate from abdomen to back, chest, arms-r suddenly shift to different parts, appear in remote localities such as fingers and toes,
5) Disposition to paronychia, early stage of felons when pains are sharp and agonizing, when pricking is first felt, nails brittle.
6) Sciatica : Pains shoot down thigh, worse right side, better when perfectly still.
7) Relaxation & coldness of genital organs with great despondecny.
8) Seminal emissions during sleep with vivid dreams of women all night and weak knees.
9) Ailments from : Tea drinking, excess in eating, fasting, errors in diet, onanism.

General Modalities :
Agg.: Lying, sitting, bending double.
Ame : Motion, walking difficult compelled to walk even though tired.

CHAPTER :95 DIPHTHERINUM

Trituration of A Nosode

Diphtheric membrane

INTRODUCTION

Diphtherinum is prepared like all nosodes and animal poisons, according to the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia and like all homoeopathic remedies, is entirely safe when given to the sick. Like all the nosodes it is practically worthless in potencies below the 30th, its cura-tive value also increases with increases of potency from the 200th to the M and C.M. It need not and should not be repeated too frequently. It will cure in every case that crude antitoxin will and is not only easy to administer but also safe and entirely free from dangerous sequellae. Besides, it is homoeopathic. Dr. H.C. Allen had used it for twenty five years as a prophylactic and had never known a second case of diphtheria to occur in a family after it had been administered. The profession is asked to put it to the test and publish the failures to the world.

CLINICAL

Croup. Diphtheria. Post diphtheritic paralysis. Epistaxis. Tonsillitis. Myelitis.

CONSTITUTION

Especially adapted to scrofulous, psoric or tuberculous persons, prone to catarrhal affections of throat and respiratory mucous membranes. Persons with weak or exhausted
vitality are hence extremely susceptible to the diphtheritic virus. Diathesis—Especially adapted to strumous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) When the patient from the beginning seems doomed, and the most carefully selected remedies fail to relieve or permanently improve.
2) In diphtheria when the attacks from the onset tends to malignancy (Lac Can., Merc.Cy.)
3) Painless diphtheria where the symptoms are almost or entirely objective. Patient is too weak, apathetic or too prostrated to complain. Sopor or stupor but easily aroused when spoken to (Bapt., Sulph.)
4) Epistaxis or profound prostration even collapse almost at very beginning. Pulse weak, rapid and vital reaction very slow.
5) Diphtheritic membrane, thick dark, grey or brownish black; temperature low or subnormal, pulse weak and rapid; extremities cold and marked debility; patient lies
  in a semistupid condition; eyes dull, besotted (Apis., Bapt.)
6) Dark red swelling of tonsils and palatine arches; parotid & cervical glands greatly swollen.
7) Discharges from throat, nose and mouth are very offensive. Breath is horribly offensive. Tongue is swollen, very red & has little coating.
8) Swallows without pain, but fluids are vomitted or returned by the nose.

Relation :

In laryngeal diptheria after Chlor., Kali Bi. or Lac. Can. fail. In post diphtheritic paralysis after Caust., Gels. fail.

CHAPTER :96 DROSERA ROTUNDIFOLIA

Sundew Droseraceae

INTRODUCTION

It is a drug prepared from vegetable kingdom. It was first introduced by our Master Hahnemann, but mastered equally well by Dr. Tyler as she remarks in her
Drug Picture in the following words. “A few years ago, I came to the startling conclusion that the only two people who really knew anything about
Drosera were Samuel Hahnemann and myself.” She proved her statement in her subsequent writings when she unfolded the therapeutic effects of this wonderful drug
in the sphere of respiratory affections, particularly the tubercular infection. Later on, clinical experiences confirmed that Drosera is not a drug with its spheres of action to whooping cough only but is capable of fighting the tubercular infection too, particularly of bones and glands.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Acts markedly upon the respiratory organs by its influence on the pneum nerve. It also affects bones and glands.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces spasmodic dry cough; stimulating whooping cough. Drosera can break down resistance to tuberculosis and should, therefore, be capable of raising it (Dr.Tyler).

CONSTITUTION

There is no particular constitutions of the patient as such. The patient is very chilly,having tubercular diathesis and a psoric background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS >
1. Crawling sensation in the larynx as from a feather.
2. Nocturnal cough of young persons in phthisis.
3. Violent spasmodic, frequent spell of barking cough, aggravated at night, after midnight, warmth, drinking, singing, laughing, weeping and LYING DOWN.
4. Cramping constriction runs all through the remedy,
5. Difficult swallowing of solids.
6. Gnawing pain in the joints.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory Symptoms :

Cough : Suited especially in WHOOPING cough with violent paroxysms which follow one another rapidly.
Time: Usually at night.

Sensatin: Sensation of a feather in larynx, which excites cough. Sense of constriction and crawling in larynx.

Character of Cough: Deep-sounding, hoarse, barking cough.

Spasmodic cough with gagging, retching and vomiting.

During cough, there is vorniting of water, mucus and often bleeding from nose and mouth.

Violent tickling in the larynx brings on cough, makes the patient get up from sleep, coming on every few hours.

There is spasmodic difficulties of chest and larynx, causing difficult breathing and suffocation.
Sensation as if something in the chest preventing breathing when talking or coughing.

The face becomes purple from spasms in larynx with suffocation. Severe attack of stitching in the chest when sneezing. Compression of the chest. Burning sensation in the chest, stitching pain in the chest. With cough there is copious sweat all over the body.

Character of sputa: Usually there is no expectoration. But where there is expectoration, the sputa is yellowish or greenish.

Modality: Aggravation after mid-night, by warmth, drinking, singing, talking, laughing, speaking, LYING DOWN as soon as head touches the pillow; after measles.

Laryngitis :

There is severe hoarseness with sore throat.

Sensation: Constriction and crawling sensation in the throat, tickling as from a feather like sensation in the larynx.

Character: Cle en’s sore throat with rough, dry, scraping sensation in deep fauces. Voice is hoarse, deep, toneless, cracked; requires great exertion to speak. The hoarseness and continued irritation cause coughing and scraping of the larynx.

Phthisis :
Drosera is especially suited in phthisical condition of the lungs and larynx.

Character of cough: There is violent deep sounding, hoarse, barking cough, which is spasmodic in nature with gagging, retching and vomiting. NOCTURNAL COUGH of young persons in phthisis.

Character of pain: With cough, there is stitching pain in the chest. The patient must hold the chest with both the hands to get relief.

Character of sputa: During coughing, there is bleeding from various orifices, especially from the nose, throat, larynx and chest, Bloody saliva and haemorrhage from the mouth with bloody or purulent
sputa. During coughing there is blue face with spasm of extremities.

Modality: Aggravation from talking, laughing, singing, and after mid-night.

Tuberculosis of bone : Drosera is a good drug for spinal caries with extreme deformity.
Sciatica : There is pressing pain in the hip region; aggravation from pressure, stooping, lying on painful side and relieved after rising from bed.
General Modilities :
Aggravation.: After mid-night, lying down, on getting warm in bed, drinking, singing and laughing.

Relations :
Antidotes: Camphor.
Complementary to: Nux vomica.
Follows well: After Samb., Sulph., Ver.alb.
Followed by: Calc., Puls., Sulph.
Compare: Cina, Coral, Cup., Ipecac and Samb., in spasmodic coughs.
Master Hahnemann advises that only a single dose of the 30th potency c ures within 7 or 8 days and not to repeat which spoils the cure.

CHAPTER: 97 DULCAMAKA

Bitter Sweet HAHNEMANN Solanaceae

INTRODUCTION
For this important drug and its exact and scientific use, we owe gratitude to our Master Hahnemann. It was regarded by him as “a very powerful plant” and he says that its duration of action is a long one. “Before the scientific proving of the drug was made”, remarked Kent “our mothers used to make ointments of Dulcamara for its astonishing, soothing effects on smarting wounds over the skin surface”. This effect has been proved and established rationally by a dozen of provers whom Hahnemann employed.

CLINICAL
Anasarco, Catarrh, Bladder affection, Cough, Cholera, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Dysentery, Fevers, Headache, Herpes, Influenza, Lumbago, Measles, Meningitis, Nettle rash,

Neuralgia, Ophthalmia, Nose affection, Skin troubles, Tonsillitis, Urinary affection, Warts, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Dulcamara affects subversively as well as curatively all mucous membranes, besides glands, skin and muscles.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes glandular enlargement, especially of the lymphatic system, cellular effusion and produces skin eruptions. It also produces catarrhal inflammation of mucous

membrane and skin, resulting in profuse secretion-of mucous membrane and skin.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up : Especially suited to persons of phlegmatic scrofulous constitution.
Temperament: Irritable temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Neither chilly not hot. Easily affected by sudden change from heat to cold or from cold to wet rainy weather.

Miasm: Sycotic and Psoric patient.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Duleamara is an excellent remedy for the troubles BROUGHT ON OR AGGRAVATED BY EXPOSURE TO COLD DAMP RAINY WEATHER or sudden changes in hot weather, when the days are hot and nights are
cold (Bry).
Consequent upon perspiration being suppressed, there is INCREASED SECRETION OF MUCOUS MEMBRANE which is a great symptom of Dulcamara.

Catarrhal condition and profuse discharges such as urine, saliva, loose stool, mucus in respiratory organs e.g., are very conspicuous.
General AGGRAVATION FROM COLD AND RELIEF BY WARMTH.

Urticaria and other various skin troubles all over the body without fever.
A curious regional effect of Dulcamara is at or about the umbilicus where pinching and shooting pain occurs again and again.There will be RASH and other eruptions on face, hands and arms before menses (Conium). There is a general tendency to throw out eruptions all over the body.
Whey-like and milky urine catarrhal ischuria; in grown up children with milky urine, from wading with bare feet in cold water; involuntary urine.

Anasarca: after ague, rheumatism or scarlet fever; dropsy after suppressed sweat, suppressed eruptions or exposure to cold.
There is mental confusion; cannot find the right word for anything.

Ailments from : Exposure to cold GETTING WET IN RAIN, damp cold, weather; wading in water with bare feet, washing checked perspiration, suppressed and
checked eruptions; when the days are hot and the nights are cold.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: From exposure to cold, getting wet in rain, damp cold weather, etc.

Character of headache: There is occipital headache ascending from the nape of neck. There is
digging pain in forehead, with sensation as if the brain were too large. Stupefying pain in back part of the head. Back of the head is chilly, heavy and aching during cold weather. Headache is relieved by talking.

Concomitants: Along with headache, there may be vertigo, especially on walking in the morning or when rising from bed,

Eyes:

Causation: Cold, every time the patient takes cold, it settles in the eyes, Due to catarrhal condition there is profuse discharge from the eyes,
Character of discharge: Thick, yellowish, profuse, discharges with granular lids, every time he takes cold.
Modalities: Aggravation from open air, cold damp weather. Amelioration in closed room.
Nose :
Causation: From cold damp weather.


. AchAMEDICA

Due to catarrhal condition of the mucous membrane of nose there is, profuse, watery discharges from nose or there may be dry coryza too.
Character of discharge: Thick, yellowish and profuse. In infants and children, there is snuffles, ‘They cannot breathe through the nose.

Modalities: Aggravation from cold air, damp weather. Amelioration in a warm room.

Gastro-intestinal, symptoms :
Diarrhoea :
Causation: Taking cold in damp places or during damp, foggy weather, changes from warm to cold weather.
Character of stool: Yellow, slimy stool greenish, with undigested food substances. Profuse and watery due to catarrhal condition of mucous membrane of intestine. Mucous diarrhoea alternately
yellow and greenish.
Modality: Aggravation from cold, damp wet weather.
Urine :
Causation: Cold damp weather, from wading with bare feet in cold water.
Character of urine: When the unrine is stored it becomes thick, purulent, sediment yellowish;
white discharge with constant urging to urinate. Every time he takes a little cold, frequency of urination is increased. Urine becomes irritating; the catarrah of the bladder rises up like a flame. There is catarrhal
ischuria. especially in grown-up children with milky urine (Cina); involuntary, from wading with bare feet in cold water.

Modality: Aggravation from cold damp wet weather.
Cough :

Causation: From cold air, damp wet rainy weather.

 Character of cough: Due to catarrhal condition of mucous membrane of respiratory tract, there is loose cough with free expectoration, spasmodic cough with excessive secretion. There is

 Character of sputa; Sputa is thick, yellowish, profuse with loose rattling cough. Patient must cough all the time to expel phlegm.

 Modalities: Aggravation from cold, damp, rainy weather. Amelioration in a warm room.
 Rheumatism :

Causation: From cold, damp, rainy weather or sudden changes in hot weather, living or working in damp places, suppressed perspiration. .

Character of pain; The joints are inflamed, swollen and red. There is aching pain, sore, lame and bruised feeling all over, very much sensitive to touch, lameness and stiffness in back,

Modalities: Aggravation in the evening and at night, during rest, Amelioration by moving about (Ferum met., Rhus tox.).
Skin :

Causation: Damp, wet and rainy weather, from cold, etc. It has got tendency to throw, out eruptions over the body. It is one of the very good Eruptive medicines.

Character of Skin: It produces vesicular type of eruptions, with brown, humid crusts, multiple little boil like eruptions. Eruptions especially upon the scalp with sense of itching and scratching and extreme sorness. Patient goes on scratching until it bleeds, but scratching does not relieve. Eruptions that come out upon the face, upon thehead, nose, but especially upon the cheeks which is completely covered with crusts. There is URTICARIA all over the body without fever. There is sense of itching and scratching, followed by burning; aggravation from warmth and relief in cold. The skin also produces WART-LIKE ERUPTIONS all over the body, eruptions which are large, fleshy, smooth, especially on the face and back of the hand and fingers (Thuja).
Eruption on the face before menses (Conium). Rash before menses.

Fever :

The drug can be thought of in any kind of pyrexiai conditions, particularly when the exciting factor is expousure to damp wet weather, drenchihg in rain, etc.


Causation: Due to cold air, damp weather, rainy weather.

Mode of onset: Onset is very slow. 

During fever: Dulcamara causes profuse secretion from mucus, membranes of the body. Due to this action, there is profuse ness of discharges, there is also profuse catarrhal discharge from nose, which is thick and yelbwish. There is dry burning heat all over the body with chilliness towards the evening arfd with thirst. There is dull headache during fever with catarrhal discharge from the nose. With fever, there is loose cough and profuse yellowish watery stool.

Modalities: Aggravation from cold, damp rainy weather or sudden change in warm weather.

Amelioration in warm room.


General Modalities :

Aggravation: From cold in general, damp rainy weather, cold air, suppressed eruption and sweat.

Amelioration: Better by moving about and from warmth dry weather, warm air and walking.

Relations :

Complementary to: Baryta carb., Kali sulph.

Antidotes: Cup., Merc.

Antidoted by; Camph., Cup., Ipeac, Kali, carb., Merc.

Followed well by; Bry.., Calc. carb., Lyco., Rhus., Sep., Verat. alb.

CHAPTER: 96 EQUISETUM HYEMALE

EQUISETUM HYEMALE Scouring Rush SMITH Equisetaceae

CLINICAL
Cystitis. Dropsy. Enuresis. Gravel Haematuria.

Gonorrhoea. Gleet. Urine-retention of.

The chief effects of Equisetum are found in the urinary > organs, it principally acts an urinary bladder. It is very popu-lar remedy for enuresis, gonorrhoea, gleet, haematuria, gravel and dropsy. Its indications are as

follows :—

1) Frequent & intolerable urging to urinate, with severe pain at close of urination (Barb., Sars., Thuja)
2) Constant desire to urinate; passes large quantity of clear watery urine without relief.
3) Severe dull pain the bladder, as from distension not relieved after urinating. .
4) Sharp, burning, cutting pain in urethra while urinating.
5) Enuresis day & night (Arg Nit., Caust.) with profuse watery urine of unknown cause.
6) Incontience in children with dreams or nightmares when passing urine and in old women.
7) Retention and dysuria during pregnancy and after deliv-ery.
8) Deep pain in the region of right kidney extending to lower abodomen with urgent desire to micturate.

Modialities :

Agg. : Right side, movement, pressure, bouch, sitting down.

Amel : In afternoon, from lying down.

CHAPTER :99ERIGERON CANADENSIS

Flea-bane W.H. BURT Compositae

CLINICAL

Bruises. Dysuria. gleet. Gonorrhoea.Haemorrhages. Placenta praevia. Wounds.Dysentery. Bladder affection of.Erigeron is chiefly known as a remedy for haemorrhages and congestions in all parts of the body. Haemorrhages are caused and cured by this remedy. The haemorrhage of this remedy, it is immaterial from what orifice it may take place : is characterised by the bright redness of the blood (Mill. Tyill.). It can be used with great advantages in cases of haematemesis due to ulceration or rupture of blood vessels in the stomach, in epistaxis, haemorrhage from the bowels may be due to fissures, metrorrhagia and menorrhagia from urinary bladder, chronic cystitis, polyp & malignancy etc. Haemorrhage from the uterus, bloody lochia even leucor-rhoea are usually attended with painful micturition or urinary irritation and in some cases with irritation of the rectum. Dr. Moore used Erigenon in several cases of placenta praevia where the indications were profuse flow of bright red blood, pallor, weakness, and an aggravation of the flofrom the slightest movement on the part of the patient. Author has found this remedy very useful in checking the haemorrhage from urinary bladder than any other remedy. It may be due to chronic cystitis, polyp or malignant condition.

Female : This remedy is indicated in metrorrhagia menorrhagia, leucorrhoea andprolapsus uteri etc. Usually when associated with violent irritation of bladder & rectum.
Bright red flow. Bloody lochia returns after least motion & comes in gushes. Pregnant women with “Weak uterus”. Nosebleed instead of menses.


CHAPTER :100 Eupatorium Perfoliatum

Boneset HAHNEMANN Compositae

INTRODUCTION

Commonly known as Boneset or Ague-weed, Eupatorium perfoliatum is a remedy with which every Homoeopath is more or less familiar especially in the management of acute fevers like Dengue, Influenza, Malaria, etc. In regard to its common name “Boneset”. DR. N.M. CHOUDHURY SAYS “The name Boneset is very apt in as much as it conveys to the mind the supreme characteristic of the drug viz. it soothes painful bone. So important is this symptom that its absence may be regarded as a contra-indication for Eupatorium”.

CLINICAL

Bilious fever, Bone pains, Cough, Dengue, Influenza, Intermittent fever, Soreness, Headache, Rheumatism, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Eupatorium perfoliatum acts principally upon the gastro-hepatic organs and bronchial mucous membrane and fibrous tissue.

PATHOGENESIS
It produces, as one of its most characteristic conditions, bilious derangement with tenderness of hepatic region and vomiting of bile. It also produces sorenss and aching of muscles and bones which accompany some forms of febrile diseases like malaria and influenza.

CONSTITUTION

There is no particular constitution as such of this patient. However, the remedy is more adapted to diseases of people, having worn out constitution due to excessive abuse
of alcohol, cachexia, from prolonged or frequent attacks of bilious or intermittent fevers.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Brusised feeling as if broken all over the body (Arn., Pyrogen, Ham.).
2. Bone pains of all description appear in the remedy. Pains affecting back, head, chest, limbs, especially the wrists which feel as if dislocated. The more general and severe the pain, better the remedy is indicated and adapted.
3. Painful SORENESS runs throughout Eupatorium perfoliatum e.g., soreness in eye balls, cough with extreme soreness down trachea, soreness of chest, headache with soreness.
4. The chill is nearly always in the morning and is preceded for several hours by thirst, soreness and aching of bones.
5. Periodicity is well marked, i.e., every 3rd or 7th day. Postponing type, chill at 9 a.m. one day, at noon the next day and so on.
6. Insatiable thirst before and during chill and fever. Knows that chill is coming because he cannot drink water enough.
7. Pain comes quickly and goes away quickly.
8. Bilious vomiting between chill and heat stage of getting on hands and knees.
9. Vertigo with sensation as if falling to the left.
10. A characteristic of Eupatorium cough is, relief by getting on hands and knees.
11. Sweat relieves all pains except headache (Nat. mur, Psor.).

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Time: Periodical headache, every 3rd or 7th day.

Location: Pain at the base of brain.

Sensation: Congestive type of headache. Sensation as if head is going to burst.

Character of pain: Throbbibg pain in the head, pressure as if a cap of lead pressed over the whole skull; extreme soreness of the head.

Modality: Aggravation after lying down.

Concomitants: Vertigo with headache, sensation as if falling to the left.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Cough : Chronic loose cough with coryza and sneezing.

 Causation : From suppressed intermittent fever or after measles.

 Sensation ; Cough excited by tickling in the chest, causing tightness of the chest.

 Character of cough ; Hawking cough with difficulty in breathing; while coughing the patient

                      must support the chest with hands.

 Character of sputa ; With cough, there is scanty expectoration.

 Character of pain : Sharp pain through right chest on deep inspiration and with SORENESS
                     INCHEST.

ken * Modality : Aggravation from lying on back, from inspiration, relieved by lying on hands and
lees.

Extremities : In chronic cases of gout and rheumatism this medicine is of great help.


Causation: After malarial fever.
 
Location: There is gouty affection with oedema of lower limbs.

Sensation: There is gouty soreness in the joints.


 Character of pain: There is aching pain in back, aching in bones of extremities, aching in
arms and writst with soreness of flesh. Gouty soreness and inflmed nodosities of joints.
There is dropsy of lower extremities, feet and ankles with severe BONE-ACHE AND BONE PAIN

Concomitants: Headache is associated with gouty affection.

Intermittent fever :
Eupatorium perfoliatum is adapted to various types of intermittent fever e.g., tertian, double tertian, postponing and bilious fever.

Time: The time of paroxysms is generally between 7 and 9 a.m. Postponing type. i.e., one day at 7 a.m. the next day at 9 a.m. and then at 11 a.m. and so on.

Before the attack: There may be nausea and vomiting and sometimes there are spells of vomiting of bile. There is great thirst for several hours before the fever.

During the attack: There is extremely severe chill. Shivering runs down the back and spreads from the back to the extremities. There is SORENESS and pulsation in the back of the head. Violent pain in the occiput and back before and during chill. During the chill, the patient wants to cover up the whole body. There is bitter vomiting at the close of chill. There is bruised feeling as if broken all over the body, bone pain affecting back, chest, limbs, especially the wrists which feel as if dislocated. The more general and severe the pain, the better it is indicated and adapted.There is insatiable thirst before and during chill and fever. The patient knows that chill is coming because he cannot drink enough. He has violent thirst but the shivering becomes worse from drinking. So he dares not drink cold water. With- fever there is bursting type of headache. There is sweat which relieves all the symptoms except headache. Bryonia is its nearest analogue having free sweat but there, pain keeps the patient quiet while Eupatorium has scanty sweat and pains make the patient restless.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Periodically and in open air.

Amelioration: Conversation, by getting on hands and knees, sweat (except in headache).

Relations :
Compare: Bryonia. Podo., Iris.

Is followed well by: Natrum mur., Sepia,

CHAPTER : 101 EUPHRASIA

Eyebright HAHNEMANN Scrophulariaceae

INTRODUCTION

Euphrasia is called, in common language, “THE EYEBRIGHT”. Its name is significant and a most appropriate one as is seen in both human provings and clinical practice. According to Grauvogl the “signature” of “a black spot in the coralla which looks like the pupil” marked Euphrasia as an eye medicine to the ancients and the Homoeopathic experiments have fully, confirmed its old time reputation.

CLINICAL

Cold, Cough, Cataract, Conjunctivitis, Eye affection, Fevers, Headache, Influenza, Lachrymation, Measles, Menstrual troubles, Nasal catarrh, Nose affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Especially acts upon the mucous membrane, particularly of the eyes, lids and upper portion of the respiratory tract.

PATHOGENESIS
It produces catarrhal inflammation of the mucous membrane, inflaming the conjunctival membranes, especially causing PROFUSE ACRID LACHRYMATION which is the chief characteristic of the drug.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Catarrhal affections of mucous membrane especially of the eyes, nose and upper respiratory tract.
2. Profuse acrid lachrymation with profuse and bland coryza (rev.—Alium cepa).
3. The eyes water all the time and are agglutinated in morning
4. Cough only in the daytime (Fer. met. Staphysagria).
5. Menses only one day or lasting only for one hour.
6. Profuse offensive expectoration of mucus by voluntary hawking.
7. Bad effects from fall, contusion, or mechanical injuries of external parts of the eye.
8. Aggravation in the evening, WARMTH and indoors,

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Euphrasia commonly has cattarrhal headache.
Sensation: As if the head is going to burst.

Character of pain: Bruised pain, stitching pain in the head. Catarrhal headache with profuse discharge from eyes and nose with dazzling of eyes.

Modality: Aggravation in the evening, from warmth and touch.

Nose :
Great sneezing and PROFUSE FLUENT CORYZA; the nasal mucous membrane is swollen. The discharge is BLAND and it occurs with ACRID LACHRYMATION.
After this coryza has lasted for a day or two, it extends into the larynx with a hard cough and much offensive expectoration.

Modality: Aggravation from exposure to warm, south wind, at night and while lying down.
Eyes :

Euphrasia is adapted to amblyopia, opacity.and ulceratin of cornea with catarrhal condition of eyes, and catarrhal conjunctivitis.

Sensation: Sensation of dryness, burning and biting in the eyes.

Character of discharge: The eyes water all the time which is COPIOUS AND ACRID. The eyes

are agglutinated in the morning. PFOFUSE ACRID LACHRYMATION WITH PROFUSE bland CORYZA (rev.—Allium cepa, where coryza is acrid and lachrymation is bland).

Look of the eyes: Margins of lids red, swollen and burning, very much sensitive to touch. There is violent itching of eyes leading to rubbing and winking. There may also 
be fine rashes about the eyes with

puffiness of lids and blurred vision.

Character of pain: Cutting pain in eyes extending to head, pressure in eyes as if caused by sand.

Modality: Aggravation in the evening, after exposure to south wind and BY WARMTH.

Cough :

Causation: After exposure to south wind.

Time: There is cough only in the daytime (Fer. met., Staphysagria),

Sensation: There is tickling sensation in the larynx.

Character of cough: There is terrible irritation in the larynx compelling the patient to cough followed by pressure beneath the sternum.

Character of sputa; Cough with copious expectoration, along WITH CORYZA AND LACHRYMATION, There is profuse expectoration of mucus by voluntary hawking.

Concomitants : During cough, there is EXCESSIVE LACHRYMATION (Natrum mur.). With cough there may also be dyspnoea and difficulty in inspiration. Loose cough with rattling in the chest.

Modality: Aggravation in daytime, on rising in the morning. Amelioration by lying down.

Female genital organs :

Menses : Euphrasia is suitable for amenorrhoea and dysmenorroea.

Time: Late or may be regular.

Quantity: Scanty.

Character of menses: Very much painful.

The menstrual flow lasts ONLY ONE DAY or sometimes only one hour with PROFUSE ACRID LACHRYMATION AND PROFUSE BLAND CORYZA.

Fever : It is indicated especially in eruptive fever like measles.

Stage: Suitable in the first stage of measles.

Time: The fever occurs mostly during the day.

During fever, there is chill with rash. There is profuse lachrymation with profuse bland coryza. The eyes water all the time. Fever is often associated with catarrhal headache as if the head is going to burst which is more in the evening. There is loose cough with rattling in chest and copious expectoration.

Look of face: The face is very much hot with coldness of body.

Sweat: Sweat especially at night, during sleep:, most profuse on chest.

Aggravation: In the evening, after exposure to south wind.

Note : Euphrasia is a wonderful medicine in measles though not so frequently indicated as Pulsatilla. But if it is given when the symptoms agree, it will back a violent attack of measles and turn it into a very
simple form, making the patient feel better, brings out eruption, control the fever and relieve the cough, Coryza and other catarrhal symptoms.

General Modality :
Aggravation: In the evening, in bed, indoors, warmth, moisture, after exposure to south wind and whery touched.

Amelioration: From coffnd in darkness.
Relations :
Antidoted by; Pulsatilla.

CHAPTER :102 FERRUM METALLICUM

Tron HAHNEMANN Fe, An Element

INTRODUCTION

The metallic iron suggests anaemia to many common people as well as to medical men. Iron plays a vital role in the manifestation of anaemia; hence the word “FERRUM” is
invariably associated with “ANAEMIA” and vice versa by orthodox school of medicine. WHAT ZINCUM IS TO NERVES, THE SAME, IRON IS TO BLOOD. Ferrum was proved by Hahnemann
who said, “most of the provings of iron were observed from the employment of the solution of the actuals of iron, yet the symptoms correspond to those of the metallic iron.”

CLINICAL

Aneamia, Asthma, Abdominal disorders, Chlorosis, Cough, Cramps, Constipation, Chorea, Convulsion, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Fever, Goitre, Haemorrhage, Headache,
Menstrual disorders, Rheumatism, Vertige. Whooping Cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Tron has chief action on the blood element, HAEMOGLOBIN OF R.B.C., skin and muscular tissues of the body are acted upon later after the blood has been primarily
affected. Gastro intestinal tract and uterus are the other seats of action.

PATHOGENESIS

Iron has an important place as a constituent of haemoglobin. Initially iron increases the R.B.C. count causing FALSE PLETHORA but later on it produces anaemia. A
disturbance of the equilibrium causes relaxation. The vessels walls dilate resulting in congestion, increased blood pressure and haemorrhage. In alimentary canal, peristalsis is weakened, producing vomiting, constipation, diarrhoea, etc.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Especially adapted to women who are PALE, weak, delicate and chlorotic, yet have a FIERY RED FACE.

Temperament: Sanguine temperament easily vexed, least contradiction excites the patient. Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Haemorrhagic diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Any RAPID EXERTION OR MOTION brings on weakness, dyspnoea, sinking and fainting.
2. A strange symptom running through Ferrum is that the PAINS AND SUFFERINGS COME ON DURING REST, such as palpitation, dyspnoea and
weakness. That is why the patient is ameliorated by MOVING ABOUT GENTLY in the house or in open air.
3. Complaints from LOSS OF VITAL FLUID as is China especially from haemorrhage.
4, EXTRENE PALENESS of the face, lips and mucus membrane which become red and flushed on least pain, emotion or exertion.
5. Red parts become white.
6. Haemorrhage from anywhere and everywhere; the character of the blood is BRIGHT RED COAGULABLE.
7. Profound prostration with general anaemia, but with tendency to flushing of face and head with headache.
8. Emaciation, weakness and trembling in frequent attacks.
9. Canine hunger or alternate loss of appetite with dislike for any food.
10. Dropsy due to loss of vital fluid, abuse of quinine, suppressed intermittents, etc.
11. Desire for bread; aversion to eggs, meat, milk, beer and sour things (Craving for eggs—Calc. carb.).
12. Fiery red tongue (Apis., Crot. hor, Pyr.).
13. Ailments from : Loss of vital fluid, abuse of quinine, suppressed intermittents, etc.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Loss of vital fluid, abuse of quinine and suppressed intermittents.

Time: Periodic type of headache, every 2,3 or 4 days or every 2 or 3 weeks.

Character of pain: Hammering, beating, pulsating type of pain in head. Congestive type of headache, pain in the back of head. Pain compels the patient to lie down:

Modalities: Aggravation by coughing and amelioration by pressure and Slow walking about.

Concomitants: With headache, there is vertigo with balancing sensation as if on water; also there may be aversion to eating and drinking.

Vertigo :

When there is vertigo, the patient feels a peculiar sensation of balancing, as if on water, or the vertigo appears on seeing flowing water, or as if walking over water when crossing a bridge, or on descending.

Stomach :

There is canine hunger or alternate loss of appetite with dislike for all food. There may be regurgitation and eructation of food in mouthfuls afterdating. Distension and pressure in the abdomen after eating. The patient may also have flatulent dyspepsia with heat and burning in stomach. There is nausea followed by Vomiting immediately after eating. As soon as food is eaten, the patient leaves the table suddenly and with one effort vomits everything eaten. After vomiting, the patient
can sit down and eat again as before in stomachful. Vomiting sour, acid and full of the smell of ingesta.

Diarrhoea :
Time: At night (China, Puls., Chel).
Character: Painless, with ineffectual urging; stool contains undigested food particles.
Modality: Aggravation at night, WHILE EATING AND DRINKING.
Concomitants: With diarrhoea, there is good appetite and prolapse of rectum. The diarrhoea causes progressive emaciation of the patient.
Constipation :
Cause: From intestinal atony.

Character of stool: Stool is dry, knotty, with ineffectual urging. Stool is followed by backache and cramping pain in the rectum; prolapse of rectum and itching of anus at night.
Concomitants: Along with hard, dry, knotty, stool, there is prolapse of rectum and itching of anus.

Menses :
Time: Too early.
Quantity: Too profuse.
Duration: Too long lasting.

Character of blood: Bright red, easily coagulable. Discharge of long pieces of membrane from uterus; intermittent flow; returns after 2 or 3 days; in women who are too weak, debilitated, chlorotic and extremely pale,yet has a fierly red face with pale, watery, debilitating flow. Concomitants; With menses, there is ringing in the ears.
Cough :
Time: Only in the daytime (Euphrasia, Staphysagria).

Character: Dry, spasmodic, with cough there is pain in occiput. Chest oppressed with breathing difficulties. There may also be haemoptysis with red blood—stained sputa.

Modality: Cough is relieved by lying down and eating.

Rheumatism :
Side: Rheumatism of the left shoulder.

Character: Tearing pain, inability to raise the arm. Rheumatic pain in the deltoid muscle. Violent pain in muscles and along the nerves, tearing and stinging nature of pain. Rest brings on the pain of forearm.

Modality: Aggravation from the cold and rest, and relieved by slowly moving about.

Ferrum Metallicum

Anaemia :

Causation: From loss of vital fluid, abuse of quinine. Anaemic condition due to loss of blood, especially from haemorrhage. Due to anaemia, the patient is PALE and waxy, muscles become flabby and relaxed. There is dropsical condition of skin which pits on pressure. The skin is pale, waxy, yet the face shows an appearance of plethora. From every little excitement the face becomes flushed.

General Modalities :

Aggragation: At night, at rest especially while sitting still.

Amelioration: Walking about slowly and in summer.

Relations :

Complementary to: Alumina, Cinchona.

Antidoted by: Ars., Hepar, Ipecac., Puls.

Antidotes: Ars., lod., Merc.

CHAPTER: 103 FERRUM PHOSPHORICUM

Ferric Phosphate DR. J.C. MARGAN Fe3(PO,),

INTRODUCTION

It is one of organic tissue salts introduced: by Schussler. Its function is to: lend ‘colour or pigment to the blood corpuscles. It also carries oxygen to all parts of the body. The deficiency in this cell salt leads to disturbance of circulation: Disturbed circulation again in its trend ‘causes. other disturbances in the normal equilibrium of the human system. This remedy needs thorough proving for detail symptomatology. The symptoms available are derived from the writings of Schussler, proving by 
J.C.Margan & some clinical experiences of homoeopathic practitioners.

CLINICAL

Debility, Ear-affections of, Epistaxis, Fever, Headache; Haematuria, Haemoptysis. Haemor-rhages. Inflammations. Injuries, Pleurisy, Pneumonia, Rheumatism. Urine-

incotinece of, varicose veins.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

The main action of this drug is on relaxed muscular tissue and the blood corpuscles.

GUIDING SYMPTOMES
1) First stage of all febrile disturbances and inflammations before exudation sets in.
2) In the early stages of febrile conditions, it stands midway between asthenic activity of Aconite and Belladonna and the asthenic sluggishness and torpidity of Gelsemium.
3) Nervous, sensitive, anaemic persons with false plethora and easy flushing.
4) Haemorrhages : Bright red blood from any orifice.
5) It corresponds to Grauvogl’s Oxygeniod Constitution.
6) Desire for stimulants.
7) Aversion to meat & milk.
8) Headache better cold applications.
9) Ailments from : 111 effects of sunheat. Exposure to cold.
10) Mind : Indifference to ordinary matters. Loss of courage and hope, -better after sleep. Inability to command the right words or express himself.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation : Sunheat, Cold.
Location : Right sided headache from vertex to supraorbital region.

Sensation : Congestive headache. Throbbing sensation, bruising, pressing or stitching pain &
soreness to touch, cold, noise, Jar. * ie to

Modalities : Aggravation—Right side, shaking the head, stooping and motion.
Amelioration : Cold application.

Eyes :
Acute conjunctivitis. Hyperaemia of Optic disc and retina with blurred vision Eyes inflamed, red with Gunning sensation, sore and redness looking and retinal congestion. Sensation as if grains of sand were under eyelids.

Ears :
First stage of otitis. Membrana tympani red and bulging; Acute otitis, when Belladonna fails. Earache after expo-sure to cold or wet Inflammatery earache with burning or throbbing pain or sharp, stitching pain.

Gastrointestinal Symptoms :

Throat: Inflammation of the fauces. Ulcerated throat. Sore throat, dry, red inflamed with much pain—First stage of diphtheria to lessen the fever. Sore throat of singers. 

Stomach : Aversian to meat & milk. Desire for stimulants. First stage of gastritis, with pain swelling and tenderness at the pit of the stomach. Vomiting of undigested food, bright red blood. Sour eructations.

Abdomen : First stage of dysentery with much blood in discharges. Stool watery. Contains mucus and blood, urging but no tenesmus. Constipation with prolapse and haemor-rhoids. Haemorrhoids,
inflamed or bleeding bright red blood.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Nose : Congested mucous membranes. First stage of all cold in the head, predisposition to catch cold. Catarrhal fever. Epistaxis.; bright red blood.

Chest: First stage of all inflammatory affections. Conges tion of lungs ; cough, hard, dry with sore chest. Short painful tickling cough, Cough better at night. Expectoration of pure blood in Pneumonia. Bronchitis of young children, Haemop-tysis.

Urinary Symptoms :

Frequent desire to urinate, urine spurts out with every cough. Haematuria. Incontinence. Irritation at neck of bladder. Polyuria. Diurnal enuresis.

Female Genital Symptoms :Menses every three weeks. Profuse with pressure in abdomen and small of the back and pain on top of the head.

Vaginismus : Vagina dry & hot, pain in vagina on coition. Bearing down sensations and constant dull ovarian pains.


Back & Extremities : Stiff neck from cold. Articular rheumatism especially of the shoulder. Pains extend to the upper part of the chest. Whitlow, palms of hands are hot. Hands swollen & painful. Rheumatic pains worse from motion and better from warmth.

Fever : All catarrhal and inflammatory fevers, chilled every day at (one) 1 P.M. High Fever, quick pulse and increased temperature ; copious night sweat; dry heat of palms,face, throat and chest.

General modalities :

Aggravation : At night and 4 to 6 A. M. touch, Jar., motion, right side.

Amelioration : Cold applications. Relationship : Compare Aco, China, Gels.



CHAPTER:104 FLUORIC ACID

Hydrofluoric Acid HERING HFL

INTRODUCTION

Fluoric acid is a colourless liquid obtained by distillation. It unites with water violently and dissolves all ordinary metals. But heavy metals like platinum, gold, silver, mercury, lead, etc. are not soluble in Fluoric acid. It is a strong irritant and causes burns. It is a DEEP and LONG ACTING remedy.

CLINICAL

Abscess, Alcoholism, Bone affections, Cicatrix, Eye affection, Fistula, Goitre, Gonorrhoea, Haemorrhodids, Hair falling of, Hands perspiring, Headache, Locomotor ataxia, Nose affection, Ulcers, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on skin, deep tissue, veins and bones.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action on the skin, causes ulcers of syphilitic nature and on the bones its action results in caries and necrosis.. Much weakness and premature old age are also

manifested by Fluoric acid.

CONSTITUTION
Make-up of the body: Premature old age. Young people too old (Arg. nit., Kreosote, Secale cor.).


Relation with heat and cold: The Fluoric acid patient is NEITHER HOT NOR CHILLY. It indicates PENDULUM-LIKE CHARACTER between heat and cold (Puls). He is less affected by the excessive heat of summer or cold of winter. However, his troubles are aggravated by warmth and relieved by cold.

Miasm: Psora, Syphilis and Sycosis—any or all of them may be in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Fluoric acid is especially suited to old people and complaints of old age; of YOUNG PEOPLE WHO LOOK OLD and attain premature old age,
2. Burning, unusual heat and acidity are the words that qualify a great many symptoms. Discharges from ulcers, eyes and nose are very much ACID AND EXCORIATING. Even the sweat is acrid.
3. As is common to all acids, PROFOUND WEAKNESS AND DEBILITY run through the whole drug.
4, The pain of Fluoric acid is very characteristic. It is LIGHTNING like and on a small spot. Pain comes suddenly, lasts for a short time and disappears quickly.(Bell.        Mag.phos.)
5. The patient has increased ability to exercise without danger. This is a very striking ., and unique characteristic symptom of Fluoric acid.
6. The patient is less affected by excessive heat of summer or cold of winter. This too is a very peculiar sypnptom of this valuable remedy.
7. For vicious bone diseases, in necrosis, caries, fistulous openings, fistula lachrymalis and fistula in ano, in calcareous degeneration, etc. Fluoric acid is infallible.
8. There is general aggravation by warmth and relief by cold application.
9. Ailment from : Syphilis, abuse of Mercury or Silica.

PARTICULARS

Ulcer :

Ulcer of syphilitic or psoric origin are very successfully treated by Fluoric acid. Old cicatrices become red and round edged and threaten to become open ulcers.
Varicose veins and ulcers in obstinate and long standing cases; especially in women who have borne many children, are admirably dealt with by Fluoric acid. The ulcers have red edges and vesiciles; decubitus, from which copious offensive and acrid discharge comes out, with violent lightning like pain. The pain is confined to a small spot; the Pains are aggravated by warmth and relieved by cold. All caries and necrosis, especially of long bones whether psoric, or syphilitic or caused by abuse of Mercury or Silica, it matters little, can be satisfactorily tackled by Fluoric acid. In the case of naevus of children and capillary aneurysm, Fluoric acid can be thought of as an effective remedy to give complete relief. Furthermore, for the exostosis of long bones or bones of face, rapid caries of teeth, fistula dentalis or lachrymalis. Flouric acid is an infallible remedy.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: By warmth.

Amelioration: By cold application.

Relations :

Complementary to: Silicea and Coca,
Followed by: Sulph., Nit. ac.
It follows: Sil. as Sil. follows Puls.

CHAPTER :10 GELSEMIUM

Yellow Jesamine W.E. PAYNE LoganiaceaeeT,

INTRODUCTION

Gelsemium is said to be the “KING OF POLIO”, by virtue of its being a great paralyser. It is a drug of importance in Homoeopathy not for its great number of
symptoms but due to its well marked and clearly characteristic symptoms which are very often met within our day to day practice.

CLINICAL

Ataxia, Brain affection, Cerebro spinal meningitis, Cold, Cough, Constipation, Convulsion, Epilepsy, Dengue fever, Diarrhoea, Diphteria, Eye affections, Fevers, Headache, Heart affection, Hysteria, Locomotor Ataxia, Menstrual disorders, Myalgia, Neuralgia, Paralysis, Rheumatism, Sleep disordered, Tremor, Urinary affection, Vertigo, Writer’s cramp, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It acts on brain, spinal cord, occiput, neck, motor nerves, eye lids, vision, mucus membrane, sexual organs and blood. It is a right-sided remedy.

PATHOGENESIS 
Acting on the roots of motor cerebral nerve centres, motor area or the spinal cord and both voluntary and involuntary motor nerves, Gels, produces a general state of paresis, mental and physical. This is followed by cutaneous anaesthesia. The mind is sluggish and stupefied; the whole muscular system is relaxed; head and limbs feel heavy; even ptosis and diplopia may occur. Muscles refuse to obey the order of the will. It has functional paralysis of all descriptions. Tremor i: the key-note of this great remedy, and gradually total paralysis may take place. Hence, Gels, is said to be a GREAT PARALYSER.

CONSTITUTION

Look of the patient: It is an acute drug. So consideration of the constiution is not very important. But is usually more suited to children, old people and anaemic girls.

Temperament: Nervous and hysterical temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: No definite standard can be set in this respect.

Miasm: Psora is in the background,

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Gels. Symptoms such as cold, fever, headache develop several days after exposure whereas those of Aconite come only a few hours after exposure.
2. Dulness, dizziness, drowsiness and trembnling or tremor are the key-note symptoms of Gelsemium which run throughout the length and breadth of the remedy.
3. “Tremor” is the key-note of this remedy. Tremor all over the body such as trembling of tongue, hands, legs and of entire body.
4. Gelsemium is a GREAT PARALYSER. So there is complete relaxation and prostration of whole muscular system with entire motor paresis and lastly paralysis.
5. Gels. is a Great “Flu” remedy when chill runs up and down the spine with a feeling of great weight and tiredness of the entire bdy and limbs. It has also proved to be a
   prophylactic against “Flu” and cures its complications like paresis and paralysis occurring after “Flu” In short, it is an excellent medicine for Influenza—before, during and after.
6. General depression from heat of sun or summer.
7. Thirstlessness is very well-marked.
8. Headache is relieved by Profuse urination (Silicea).
9. Motion aggravates most symptoms but relieves muscular pain and heart symptoms.
10. Relief from stimulants is a general characteristic of Gels.
11. Mind : Anticipation of any unusual ordeal, when preparing for church, theatre, examination, court, public meeting, to meet engagement, etc., brings on diarrhoea. It is a good remedy for examination funk.
There is great nervousness, dread of appearing in public, stage fright, nervous to appear in examination, though he studied well.
Very excitable, irritable, sensitive, nervous with fear of death and utter lack of courage to die.
Desires to be quiet, to be let alone, does not wish to speak or have any one near her, even if the person be silent.

12. Ailments from : Fear, fright, exciting and bad news; depressing emotions, sun, thunderstorm, damp weather, warm or cold, alcohol and self-abuse.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation: Heat of summer and fright.

Location; Occipital headache, begins on occiput and spreads over the whole head and lastly settles over the forehead andieyes.
Sensation: Dull, heavy headache with heaviness of eyelids, bruised sensation. There is pain in the temples extending to the ears.
Before the headache: Dim vision or blindness.
Modalities:
 Aggravation. From heat of sun and summer.
 Amelioration: By compression, lying down with head high and fay profuse urination.

Concomitants: Vertigo, spreading from occiput, with heaviness of head. Headache with muscular soreness of neck and shoulders with blindness, DULNESS, DIZZINESS, DROWSINESS AND TREMBLING.

Eye:
Eyelids are heavy and consequently there is ptosis. Patient can hardly open them; double vision; orbital neuralgia with contraction and twitching of muscles.

Mouth :
There is putrid taste in the mouth. Tongue is thick, coated, yellowish, trembling and paralysed.

Throat :

Difficulty in swallowing, especially warm food. Post-diphtheritic paralysis (Arg. nit., Causticum).  Food and water regurgitate from the mouth and through nose at every attempt to shallow.

Heart : Snesation as if it were necessary to keep in motion, or else heart's action would cease. Pulse is slow, soft and weak when quiet, but greatly accelerated on motion.

Diarrhoea :
Gelsemium has got purely nervous diarrhoea.

Causation: Emotional excitement, fright and bad news.

Character of stool: Involuntary, painless and cream-coloured.

Concomitants: Thirstlessness, dullness, dizziness, drowsiness and trembling.

Urine :
Profuse, clear, watery urine with chilliness and trembling and intermittent flow or retention of urine.

Profuse urination relieves headache.

Fever :
oe is indicated in ANY AND EVERY TYPE of fever — intermittent, remittent or continuous Intermittent fever :

Before Chill: Thirstless and nervous. Chill especially along the spine, running up and down the back in rapid wave like succession from sacrum to occiput. Pulse is slow, soft and compressible.

Heat and sweat: Long and exhausting with ‘nuscular soreness. Great prostration and violent eadache.

Remittent fever :

Causation: Due to heat of sun, warmth or cold.

Onset: Insidious, slow and gradual.

During fever: There are DULLNESS, DIZZINESS, AND DROWSINESS accompanied with languor,muscular weakness and desire for absolute rest. Great heaviness of head and limbs.

The tongue is trembling with complete absence of thirst.There is severe headache which is relieved by profuse urination. The pulse is full and flowing.
Stuporous conditions may appear in late stage.

After fever: There may be paralysis of various group of muscles. Gels, has also proved prophylactic against Influenza.

Paralysis :Gelsemium is a great paralyser.

Character: The onset of the paralysis is gradual. It produces a general state of paresis, mental and physical. “TREMOR” is the key-note of the remedy. While the mind is absolutely sluggish, the whole body, particularly the muscular system, is relaxed. The limbs are so HEAVY and painful that the patient can hardly move them. There is complete relaxation and prostration of the whole muscular system with entire motor paralysis. Weakness and trembling of tongue, hands, legs and entire body. LACK
OF MUSCULAR COORDDNATION IS WELL MARKED; CONFUSED; MUSCLES REFUSE TO OBEY THE WILL. Locomotor ataxia and paraplegia are successfully treated by this great remedy.
 The same paretic coridition is present in eyelids, causing ptosis and diplopia; in oesophagus, producing difficulty in swallowing; in the anus which remains relaxed and open. There is hysterical dysphagia or aphonia. For post-diphtheritic paralysis. Gels, is an infallible remedy. In this case, there is paretic condition
of oesophagus and muscles of deglutition so that when swallowing something, it does not go down but goes up into the nose through which it comes out.


Modality: The paralytic condition is aggravated by damp weather, before a thunderstorm, mental emotion, excitement, bad news and when thinking of his ailments.

Concomitants : The patient is dull, dizzy, and drowsy. Tremor and trembling everywhere with ho thirst.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Heat, damp weather, before a thunderstorm, mental emotion or excitement, bad news, tobacco smoking, when thinking of his ailments and at 10 a.m.

Amelioration: Profuse urination and continued motion.

Relations :

Compare: Baptisia in threatening typhoid fever. Ipecac, in intermittent fever after suppression by quinine. . °

Antidoted by: Coffea, Dig., Nux mos,
Antidotes: Mag. phos.

CHAPTER: 106 GLONOINE
Nitro-glycerine HERING C3H,(NO,)O3
INTRODUCTION

Glonoine—Nitro—glycerine is a combination of two elements—Glycerine, which is a most inert and bland oil used as a constituent of toilet and Nitrogen,
which is a colourless, tasteless and odourless gas. When both of them are mixed in 1:4 proportion, potentised and proved according to the doctrine of
proving, it becomes one of the most valuable medicines with alarming characters Its SUDDENNESS, BURSTING, SENSATIONS, pains surging upwards which threaten to lift and shatter the cranium are very much striking and characteristic. Dr. Hughes points out in his pharmacodynamics that “though the old school uses Glonoine for various therapeutic purposes the medicine owes its introduction to eonstantine Hering one of the greatest disciples of the Master in the field of Homoeopathy.”

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris, Apoplexy, Brain affection, Bnght’s disease, Cenvulsion, Epilepsy, Headache, Heart affections,. Meningitis, Menstrual disorders, Menopausal syndrome,
Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Sun-stroke, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts especially on the brain, pneumo-gastric and vaso-motor nerves.

PATHOGENESIS
Acting upon the brain, especially medulla oblongata, pneumogastric and peripheral vaso-motor nerves, it produces cerebral hyperaemia, palpitation of heart, severe
headache, resembling those resulting from exposure to sun’s rays or sunstroke. It also causes violent and sudden disturbance in circulation with sensation of expansion,
bursting and throbbing.

CONSTITUTION
 
Physical make-up: Especially suited to plethoric sensitive persons who are very irritable and easily excited by slightest opposition.

Temperament; Nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Glonoine acts violently and suddenly in acute diseases especially of brain causing fulness, tension, throbbing and bursting sensation. Its action is so local, so sudden
so definite and torturing that it is impossible to forget Glonoine.
2. Symptoms are WORSE IN THE SUN or exposure to sun’s rays.
3. Sensation of pulsation throughout the body.
4. Surging of blood to head and heart.
5. Bad effects of mental excitement, fright, fear, mechanical injuries hair cut and SUN STROKE.
6. General weakness and depression from heat of sun or summer.
7. Weakness and trembling of tongue, hands, legs and the entire body.
8. Ailments from : Sun, heat of fire, fear, fright, injury and hair-cut.

PARTICULARS

Headfiche :
Character: From working under gas light, when heat falls on the head or WALKING IN THE SUN, from heat of stove or hair cut during pregnancy and menopause.
Sensation: Head feels ENORMOUSLY LARGE as if the skull were too small for the brain and as if skull were being lifted up.
Character of headache: Severe THROBBING, PULSATING type of headache. The patient holds the head with both hands. There is intense pain. Sensation as if the head would burst; sometimes there is great soreness in the head. Heaviness of the head with rush of blood towards the head as if all the blood has gone towards thehead. SUNSTROKE and SUN HEADACHE— increases and decreases with the sun. Headache in place of menses.

Modalities: Aggravation from shaking jar, stooping, lying down, SUN’S RAYS and while working under the gas light.
Better by bending head backwards and from covering.

Apoplexy :

In threatened apoplexy with cerebral congestion or alternate congestion of the head and heart. The brain feels too large, full, bursting, with rush of blood towards he head, blood seems to be pumped upwards; throbs at every jar. Terrific shock in the head synchronous with the pulse. There is throbbing sensation. The patient holds the head with both hands, cannot lie down, even the pillow seems to beat. With high blood pressure, there is violent palpitation, Throbbing In carotids, heart's action is slow. In apoplexy when violent pressure keeps on and congestion, continues, if it is given, it will relieve the pressure provided the symptoms agree.

Meningitis :
Causation: During the time of dentition.

Location: In the cerebro-spinal region.
Sensation: As if the neck is drawn back.

Character: Convulsion of children from cerebral congestion. The face and eyes are intensely congested and hot. Violent congestion in brain and spinal cord with convulsion throughout the limbs; the
neck and whole body drawn backwards. Opisthotonos.

Modality:

 Aggravation: Warm room increases convulsion. Children get sick in the evening, when sitting
before an open coal fire or falling asleep there.

Comparison :
Glonoine differs from Belladonna, although both of them have many symptoms in common. In Bell., the circulation within the cranium is excited because the brain is irritated; but in Glon., the brain is irritated because the cirulation is excited. The pains of Bell, are sudden in onset and sudden to leave; those of Glon., are even more so. According tg Nash, Glonoine is better adapted to the first congestive stage of inflammatory diseases of brain. Bell, goes further and may still be the remedy after the inflammatory stage is fully established. Farrington, too emphasizes that Bell. and Glon. meet the congestion and inflammation of brain. But in Bell., cri encephalige is well marked while it is less marked in Glon. Bell. is worse by bending backwards while Glon. is better by it. In both, the head feels enormously large. Bell. is better by uncovering head while Glon. is better by covering it.

Menopausal Syndrome :
Flush of heat at the climacteric age. Intense congestion of brain, from delayed or suppressed menses. The congestion may also come on during the menstrual period. If uterine haemorrhage stops suddenly, then thereis violent headache as if all the blood rushes to the head. Headache may appear in place of menses.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : In the sun, exposure to SUN’S RAYS, gas-light; overheating, jar, stooping,ascending, touch of hat, having the hair cut.
Relations :
Compare; Belladonna and Gelsemium.
Antidoted by: Aconite, Camphor, Nux vom.

CHAPTER :107 GRAPHITES

Black Lead HAHNEMANN Amorphous Carbon

INTRODUCTION

Graphites is one of the top ranking ‘WOMEN’S REMEDIES’. It is a deep acting constitutional polychrest drug derived from the mineral kingdom. Ordinarily, the’’crude lead
possesses no curative power, but after undergoing the process of potentisation, it earns a respectable place amongst the important medicines in the box of a Homoeopath.

CLINICAL

Anaemia, Acne, Breast affection, Cancer Catarrh, Chiorosis, Colic, Constipation, Dropsy, Eresipelas, Eye affection, Ear affection, Gastralgia, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Liver affection, Menopausal syndrome, Menstrual disorders, Stomach and abdominal disorders, Skin affections, Tumours, Urinary disorders, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The chief spheres of action of Graphites are centred upon skin, gastrointestinal tract, sexual organs, glands, etc.

PATHOGENESIS
Its action on skin produces degenerative changes, manifestation of various kinds of skin eruptions from which oozes a WATERY, TRANSPARENT AND STICKY FLUID. It exerts a general influence on nutrition of skin; whereby it causes diarrhoea, chronic constipation etc. in the digestive system and excessive menstrual ailment, leucorrhoea.
etc. in sexual organs.

CONSTITUTION
Moke-up of the body; Usually a lady of climacteric age, fair, fat and flabby, having irregular deposition of fat at selected locations of the body, waxy and anaemic face, split hair, unhealthy skin, brittle and deformed nails, suffering from habitual constipation and with a history of delayed rnenstruation.

Temperament: Irritable and melancholic. Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.
Miasm: Psora is in the background.
Diathesis: Tubercular and cancerous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

.Especially adapted to woman of climacteric age, generally inclined to obesity, who suffers from habitual constipation and with history of delayed menstruation. 

.A marked characteristic of Graphites is rush of blood to head with flushed face or rush of blood to head with distention and flatulence.

.Cracks and fissures on end of fingers and toes, nipples, labial commissures, anus, etc. a Omni decunt”

 From the moist skin eruptions oozes a watery, transparent and sticky fluid. Whenever such eruptions are found Graph, is in all probability the remedy.

. Disposition to delayed menstruation.

. Gastralgia better by eating or by drinking hot milk.

. Sexual debility from sexual abuse; and decided aversion to coition
.
. Hears better in noise and when riding in a carriage.

. Music makes her weep. She thinks of nothing but death.

. Desire for hot milk which relieves constipation and gastric; complaints. AVERSION to meat, fish, salt, cooked food and sweets.

Mind : Ailments from grief and vexation.

There is great dread of mental and physical work, with, excessive depression of mind. Patient is very sad; thinks of nothing but death and salvation. But there is
changeable mood. The patient can remember past events, but forgets the recent occurrences.

Sensation of a cobweb over face and forehead; tries hard to brush it off. MUSIC MAKES HER WEEP and also increases her sufferings. The patient is excessively
cautious, timid, hesitating and unable to decide about anything. She is always sad and despondent.

Ailments from : Grief and vexation; suppression of skin eruptions; extremes of heat and cold; overlifting.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: From grief, vexation, extremes of heat and cold.


Location: Congestive pain especially in the occiput; extends to the nape of neck, stitching pain in temples.

Character of headache: Pain as though the head were numb, violent headache as if the ‘Head would burst, congestive, constriqtive and stitching pain. 

Modality: Aggravation at night and during menstruation and relieved by lying down.


Concomitants: Vertigo as if intoxicated. Nausea, vomiting and eructation especially during menses, along with headache, itching of scalp; burning on vertex.

Ears:
Hears better when in a noise, when riding in a carriage or when there is a rumbling sound (Nitric.acid). Loss of hearing with dryness of ears; cracking, humming and roaring in ears. Swelling of the
glands under the ear.

Castro-intestinal tract :
Mouth : Sour, salty, bitter or putrid taste in the mouth like rotten eggs, with frequent eructations tasting of ingesta. Foul odour from mouth; increased salivation with much spitting.

Stomach : There is nausea and vomiting especially in the morning; griping colic with constrictive pain below umbilicus. Periodic gastralgia with vomiting of entire food immediately after eating. Chronic catarrh in the stomach with frequent eructation. Pain is relieved by drinking hot milk.

Diarrhoea : The patient gives a definite history of habitual constipation but suffers occasionally from diarrhoea too.

 Causation: Diarrhoea from suppressed skin eruption and alcohol (Petroleum).

 Character of stool: Stool is brown, fluid mixed with undigested substances of an intolerable foetid odour. The diarrhoea is usually painless.

 Concomitants: Associated with purging, vomiting and ice cold sweat.


Constipation : Graphites patient is generally constipated. The stool is very hard, in — Jumps, difficult to evacuate, knotty; lumps are united together with mucous threads.There may be dryness of mucous membrane of rectum, with fissure of anus. There is sharp, smarting and sore pain in anus after stool. Haemorrhoid protrudes while passing stool, associated with burning
pain, cracks and fissure.

Modality: Constipation is relieved by drinking hot milk (Rhus tox—lodum, by cold milk).
Menses : i

Time: Delayed from getting feet wet.

Quantity: Too scanty.

Duration: Short.

Character of blood; Too pale.

Concomitants: There is violent colicky pain during menses. There may also be morning sickness at the time of menstruation. The patient is weak and prostrated. Leucorrhoea before or after menses in FAT, CHILLY and. CONSTIPATED ladies. Swelling and pain in right ovarian region before and during menses.

Leucorrhoea :
In a Graphites patient, leucorrhoea appears before and after menses and it is very much acrid, and excoriating,; OCCURS IN GUSHES DAY AND NIGHT.

Skin :
Graphites is a great remedy for all sorts of skin eruptions with a tendency towards malignancy e.g- keloid, fibroma, pimples, acne, eczema, cancer of the breast, hard and painful cicatrices which have got a tendency to break open again. Erysipelas beginning in the face and spreading to other parts. Every little injury suppurates. Fissures and cracks at the end of fingers, or nipples, vulva and labial commissures. There is itching of skin over the body with or without eruptions. Skin affections are particularly located in the bend of joints, on the scalp and behind the ears. All the skin eruptions have one thing in common, viz. they EXUDE A WATERY, TRANSPARENT, GELATINOUS. STICKY FLUID. Hard cicatrices appearing after mammary abscess, retarding the flow of milk. Old cicatrices break open again. Cancer of breast, from old scars and repeated abscesses. Eruptions upon the ears; between the fingers and toes and on various parts of body from which oozes a WATERY, TRANSPARENT AND STICKY FLUID.
The nails are brittle, crumbling, and deformed; they are very painful and sore as if ulcerated, thick and crippled. Eczema of lids, eruptions moist and fissured, lids red and margins covered with scales and crusts. There is burning in round spot on vertex. Phlegmonous erysipelas on face with burning pain, commences on right side, going to left, after application of iodine. Skin affections are not inclined to heal, but ulcerate readily, with itching over various parts of the body, followed by burhing and oozing with typical STICKY FLUID discharge. Suppression of skin eruptions causes diarrhoea (Petroleum).

Clarke says, “The skin of Graphites is rough, hard and dry” Eczematous and herpetic eruptions predominate. Eruption on occiput exuding gluey humour; eczema of ears; moist eczema round anus. Pimples, acne, gastro-intestinal affections alternating with acne and erythema of face, herpetic lesions or scrofulous hypochondriasis. Excoriation between toes. Syphilitic and constitutional ulcers. Recrudescence of scars, cracks and fissures. Offensive discharges and secretions. Sweat stains garments yellow with sour and offensive smell.

Modalities: Skin affections are aggravated at night, by warmth of bed, before and during menstruation and during change of weather. Amelioration is from open air, wrapping up and in darkness.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: Warmth in general, at night, rich food, before and after menstruation, extremes of temperature, draught of cold, air, uncovering and cold drinks. :

Amelioration: From warm drink, particularly warm milk, from being wrapped up, open air, eructation and eating.

Relations :
Complementary to: Causticum, Hepar and Lycopodium.

Antidoted by: Aeon., Nux vom.

Antidotes: Are., lod., Rhus tox.

It follows well: Calc. carb., Sepia., Sulph.

Notes : Indicated after Sepia in gushing leucorrhoea.
After Sulphur in affections of skin. For obesity in young women after Calcarea carb.

CHAPTER :108 HAMAMELIS VIRGINICA

Witch Hazel HERING Hamamelaceae

INTRODUCTION

No remedy has wider spheres of usefulness in case of haemorrhage and disordered blood-vessels than Hamamelis virginica. It also has a decided relation to the effects of mechanical injuries including burns of the first degree. As a local application it ranks with Arnica and Calendula. It is widely said to
be the “ACONITE OF THE VENOUS CAPILLARY SYSTEM”. When there is oozing out of venous blood from any where in the body, either from piles or varicose veins or from nose, bowels, uterus, lungs, open injury, etc, the great anti-haemorrhagic homoeopathic medicine that we can think of first, is Hamamelis.

CLINICAL

Bone affection, Bruises, Bums, Cancer, Consumption, Enteric fever, Eye affection, Gastric Ulcer, Haematemesis, Haematuria, Haemorrhage, Haemorrhoids, Injury, Leucorrhoea, Menstrual disorders, Epistaxis, Rheumatism, Scurvy, Testicles inflammation, Threatened abortion, Uleers, Varicose
veins, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on VEINS, CAPILLARIES, liver, portal system, rectum and generative organs.

PATHOGENESIS

Acting upon the coats of veins, it causes relaxation with consequent engorgement and even structural lesions and thereby produce PASSIVE VENOUS HAEMORRHAGE FROM ANY PART.

CONSTITUTION

There is no particular constitution but Ham. is suitable for those who are having HAEMORRHAGIC DIATHESIS and suffer from diseases like PHLEBITIES, VARICOSIS.
HAEMORRHOIDS and VENOUS HAEMORRHAGE.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Intense soreness of affected parts is the key-note of this remedy.
2. Bleeding from any orifice or from open wound; blood being DARK PASSIVE AND NON-COAGULABLE.
3. The part from which the blood flows feels SORE AND BRUISED.
4, For scapula rheumatism when there is pain at the top of left shoulder and under right shoulder blade which is worse during day but is entirely absent during night,
  Hamamelis is nearly a specific medicine.
5. Motion and exertion in general aggravate troubles. Aggravation in open air and in rainy weather.
6. Ailments from : Trauma or injury, haemorrhage, etc.

PARTICULARS

Haemorrhage :
It is better adapted to PASSIVE VENOUS HAEMORRHAGE from any orifice of the body; nose (RHINORRHAGIA, lungs, (HAEMOPTYSIS), stomach (HAEMATEMESIS), bowels (MALAENA), bladder (HAEMATURIA), uterus (MENORRHAGIA), etc.

The character of blood is PROFUSE, DARK, GRUMOUS. Haemorrhage after a fall or rough riding. There is intense sorness of the affected parts. Vicarious menstruation is also found in it.

Nose-bleed :
Causation: Idiopathic, traumatic, vicarious, of childhood. Flow is passive, long lasting and venous. Blood is non-coagulable (Crot.) profuse, which relieves headache.
Eye: It hastens absorption of intraocular haemorrhage.

Haemoptysis :
Ticking cough with taste of blood or sulphur; without effort or coughing; sometimes lasts for months or years. Chest feels sore and constricted.

Modality: Aggravation from motion and little exertion.

Haematemesis :

Throbbing pain in stomach. PROFUSE BLEEDING DARK BLOOD, SORENESS IN THE ABDOMEN, haemorrhage from intestine during typhoid or in dysentery, profuse bleeding, dark blood.
Anus feels raw and sore, Haemorrhage does not cause any mental anxiety.

Modality: Aggravation from motion and little exertion.

Haematuria :

Dark blood with increased desire to urinate.

Varicosity of veins :

May be in the oesophagus (Oesophageal varices), rectum (piles), abdomen, legs, pampiniform plexus of veins of scrotum, etc. Veins dilate, elongate and become tortuous and bleed easily. Blood is dark;ulceration of the varicose veins (Fluoric acid). Extreme soreness of the part. Hamamelis can be used both internally and externally in solution taking 1 part of mother tincture and 9 parts of aqua dest for such condition, at the same time, for rapid improvement.

Injury :
.Like Amica, Calendula, etc. Hamamelis is also a very good medicine for injury, where there is continuous bleeding from the injured surface.
.Bleeding may be internal, or external, the character of blood being PASSIVE, DARK WITH SORNESS OF THE PARTS. Wounds.from which continuous bleeding takes place, be it incised, lacerated or contused, or caused from falls, it matters little. Hamamelis can bring appreciable results.
.If the mother tincture of Hamamelis is applied on cuts or wounds, it will arrest bleeding, remove pain and soreness and prevent suppuration.

Traumatic conjunctivities :

Suggilation, or extravasation into chambers of eyes, from severe coughing; intense soreness (Amica,Calendula, Ledum) can be successfully treated by this great remedy. It hastens absorption of intraocular
haemorrhage.

Piles :
Bleeding piles. Bleeds profusely, with burning, soreness, fulness and heaviness as if back would break; urging to stool, bluish colour, anus feels sore and raw. Prostration is out of proportion to amount of blood lost (Hydrastis).

Femafe genital organs :
Menses : Flow dark and profuse, with soreness in abdomen; after a blow on ovary or a fall; all sufferings aggravate at menstrual period (Actaea, Pulsatilla).

Menorrhagia occurring mid-way between menstrual periods. Vagina is very tender. Vaginismus. Haemorrhoids and sore nipples, after confinement.
Rheumatism : Sore bruised feeling. When Arnica fails, think of Hamamelis.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From motion, mental or physical strain, warmth, moist air, touch, afternoon and bending forward.
Amelioration; Outdoor and open air.
Relations :
Complementary to: Ferrum met. in haemorrhages and haemorrhagic diathesis.
Compare: Arnica, Calendula, for trauma, and to hasten absorption of intraocular haemorrhage. 
Antidoted by: Arn., Cup., Puls.

CHAPTER :109 HELLEBORUS NIGERChristmas Rose

 HAHNEMANN RanunculaceaeINTRODUCTION

Helleborus is yet another of our Master’simmortal monuments derived from the vegetable kingdom—Chirstmas Rose, belonging to the natural order of Ranunculaceae. This is called
Christmas Rose because the flowers bloom in mid-winter. The mother tincture is prepared from the dried root. In its crude form and in physiological dose, it is poisonous but when it is
potentised, the poisonous effect is transformed into a wonderful dynamic power capable of curing brain, urinary and abdonimal symptoms.

CLINICAL
Apoplexy, Brain affection, Cholera, Concussion, Convulsion, Diarrhoea, Drospy, Headache, Hydrocephalus, Meningitis, Tetanus, Typhoid, Urinary affection, ete.

SPHERES OF ACTION
The main seats of action of Helleborus are brain, nervous system, meninges, kidney, serous membrane, urinry organs and gastro-intestinal tract.

PATHOGENESIS
Acting on brain and meninges it produces dropsical effusion leading to hydrocephalus and meningitis and many other reflex symptoms. It acts on kidney resulting in scanty
and high coloured albuminous urine; it irritates the digestive tract causing inflammation of stomach and intestine thereby producing jelly-like mucus and diarrhoea. It also causes
cerebral and general paralysis and through pneumogastric nerve, respiration is retarded and there may be cardiac paralysis.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: It is more suited to weak and delicate persons, especially children
who are prone to brain troubles with serous effusion.

Temperament: Irritable temperament,
Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient,
Miasm : Psora is in the background.


GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1.Weak and delicate patients, who are prone to brain troubles with serous effusion,
2.Melancholic, woeful and full of anguish; especially girls at puberty or when menses fail to return after appearing.
3.The patient is irritable and easily angered; does not want to be disturbed.
4. Consolation aggravates most of the complaints (Ign., Nat. mur., Lilium tig., sepia, Silicea).
5. Brain symptoms during dentition with threatened effusion.
6, Meningitis with exudation, brain-cry, and paralysis.
7. Convulsion with extreme coldness of body.
8. Diarrhoea during hydrocephalus or dentition or pregnancy. Stool contains jelly-like mucus like frog-spawn; involuntary stool.
9. Coffee-ground urine, red, black and scanty, suppressed and albuminous.
10. Dropsy of brain, chest and abdomen after intermittent fever, with debility and suppressed urine.
11. Aggravation from 4-8 p.m. (Lyco.).
12. Mind : Helleborus manifests very striking mental symptoms in many cases, such as in brain troubles with effusion, during dentition, meningitis, encephalitis,
hydrocephalus, typhoid, etc. which are as follows:

The patient is very much irritable and easily angered. Does not want to be disturbed. Very much melancholic, woeful, despairing; silent or extremely
anguished, especially girls at puberty or when menses fail to return after appearing. Consolation aggravates most of the complaints.
Brain Stmptoms during dentition (Belladonna, Podophyllum) with threatened effusion.
Unconscious and stupid when questioned answers slowly, giving a picture of acute idiocy.
. Aliments from : Dentition period, pregnancy or from suppressed exanthema.

PARTICULARS
Head :
In diseases of the brain and meninges, such as MENINGITIS, ENCEPHALITIS, HYDROCEPHALUS,
it matters little, Helleborous can be thought of if the following symptoms are present:-
The patient remains unconscious, lies in a stupid manner. When questioned, he answers slowly.
There is a picture of acute idiocy in him.
There is acute cerebro-spinal or tubercular exudation, as a result of which occur cerebral or complete
paralysis with cri-encephalique.
The look is vacant, thoughtless and staring; eyes are wide open. They are insensible to light; pupils are dilated or alternately contracted and dilated.


He has soporous sleep with occasional screams and shrieks during hydrocephalus which develops rapidly, wheather it is post-scarlatina or tubercular.
There is automatic motion of one arm and one leg.
During these troubles, there is convulsion with extreme coldness of the body, except in head or occiput which may be hot. The patient greedily swallows cold water; he bites the spoon, still remains unconscious.The mouth is in chewing motion; corners of mouth are sore, cracked; nostrils are dirty, sooty and dry.
The patient bores head into pillow, rolls head from side to side; beats the head with hand.
The patient also constantly picks his lips, clothes or bores the nose with his fingers.
There is stupefying headache. Forehead has wrinkled folds and is covered with sweat. Dull pain in occiput. Headache may culminate in vomiting.

Diarrhoea :

Patient requiring Helleborus, may suffer from diarrhoea especially during acute hydrocephalus ordention or during pregnancy. The character of stool is watery, clear, tenacious with colourless mucus or
with White jelly-like frog spawn and involuntary.

Urine :

The urine of Helleborus is alsb very characterstic The urine may be scanty or suppressed after dropsy. The colour of the urine IS DARK, RED OR BLACK, HAVING COFFEE-GROUND SEDIMENT
AND ALBUMINOUS. There is frequent urging to urinate but the child cannot urinate. Nash points out that an increase in the quantity of urine is a very good sign of the favourable reaction of this remedy in
many diseased conditions, then not to repeal but to wait.

Dropsy :

There may be dropsy after suppressed exanthema. Dropsy may be of the brain, chest or abdomen,with fever The urine may be suppressed or scanty. The skin is pale, shining and oedematous.
In chest affections or in hydrothorax, or pleurisy with effusion this remedy is infallible, and the patient can breathe easily when lying down but when sitting up there is frequent sighing. Respiration is irregular.
chest is constricted; gasps for breath during hydrothorax.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Worse from evening until morning, especially from 4-8 p.m. and from uncovering.

Relations :
Compare: Apis, Aresnic, Belladonna, Bryonta. Digitalis Lachesis and Zincum met., in brain or
meningeal affections.

CHAPTER :110 HELONIAS DIOICA

Unicorn Plant TULLY Melanthaceae

INTRODUCTION

This plant is also called the “Blazing Star’,’. Medicine is prepared from the fresh root gathered before flowering. Just like Murex, this
remedy is chiefly a woman’s remedy and is regarded as a great uterine tonic.

CLINICAL
Albuminuris. Anaemia. Breast affection. Diabetes. Menstrual anomalies. Urinary complaints. Uterine disorder.

SPHERE OF ACTION
It has specific action over the female sexual organs including kidney, mind, muscles.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Generally called for women worn out with hard work mental or physical or weakened by luxury and indolence and who complain of tired feeling in the back and limbs.
2) A consciousness of a womb. Feels it moves when she moves, it is so sore and tender.
3) Feels complaints more when thinking about them, always better when occupied.(Cale. Phos. Medo. Oxalic Acid)
4) Sensation of heaviness and soreness in pelvis.
5) Mind : Profound melancholy and great lowness of spirit. Irritable and fault finding nature. She can not endure least contradiction or receive least suggestion. Restfess,
   wants to move around as she feels better when mind and body are employed. These mentals are always associated with uterine disorder.
6) For the bad effects of abortion and miscarriage.

PARTICULARS
Female genital organs :
Menses :
Time : Too early.
Quantity : Too profuse.
Character of flow: Passive, dark, clotted and offensive.
Concomitant:
i) Anaemic and debilitated states,
ii) Breast swollen, nipples painful and tender. Leucorrhoea : Foul, lumpy and curdled.

Prolapse : Tendency to uterine prolapse due to weakness and general exhaustion of the system.From atony, in women enervated by luxury and indolence. Uterus heavy, sore, tender and ulcerated. A consciousness of womb and it moves when she moves. There is also dragging sensation in sacral region
aggravated from motion and ameliorated when doing something.

Pruritus Vulvae : Intense irritation of the external labia, which are puffed, hot, red, itch and burn terribly. Even mucous surface of labia becomes red, swollen and covered with curdled deposits.

Urinary symptoms :

When affection of kidney is secondary to the uterine trouble. There is constant aching, tenderness and burning over kidneys.

In diabetes : Urine profuse clear saccharine, with great thirst, emaciation, mental restlessness, irritability and melancholiaAlbuminuria : It is needed in acute and chronic stage. In women during pregnancy r with great weaknes, drowsiness and unusual tiredness.
Relations:
Compare : Aletris Far, Lil, Phos.ac.
Similar: to, Alet. in debility from prolapsus, protracted illness, defective nutrition.

CHAPTER :111 HEPAR SULPHUR
Sulphurate of Lime HAHNEMANN (CaS)

INTRODUCTION

Hepar sulph. is a medicine possessing a place of importance no less than Nux vomica, even in the smallest homoeopathic domestic case. Hahnemann’s Hepar sulphuris areum is
prepared by a mixture of equal parts of finely powdered shells and pure flowers of sulphur, kept for ten minutes at a uniform heat. From this the potencies are prepared. Hepar has gained a fame to be a member of one of the celebrated “Boenninghausen’s Group Powders” others being Aconite and Spongia, all in 200th potency.

CLINICAL
Abscess, Asthma, Boils, Breast affection, Bronchitis, Burns, Carbuncles, Chilblain, Chlorosis, Cold, Consumption, Cough, Diarrhoea, Ear affection, Eczema, Erysipelas, Eye
affection, Glandular swellings, Headache, Hoarseness, Jaundice, Laryngitis, Leucorrhoea, Liver affections, Throat and Lung affections, Marasmus, Menstrual
disorders, Pneumonia, Rheumatism, Skin affection, Suppuration, Urinary affection, Urticaria, Whooping cough, etc.

The author highlights how the letter “H’ is appropriate in describing the Hepar patient, as an aid to memory, as follows:

Hepar patient is hypersensitive mentally and physically, to touch, to pain and to cold air. He is hyper impulsive and heavily sweating, hasty in speech and drinking. He has
hoarseness in the morning. Héepar hastens suppuration and cure and is ameliorated by heat, hot fomentation and covering.

SPHERES OF ACTION
Hepar sulph. acts especially upon lymphatic, glandular system, skin, respiratory organ, mucous membrane. Of course, the nerves are not left behind from getting affected
by this drug. It is a powerful remedy affecting both mind and body. This is a first class irritant (or temper, nerves and tissues. Hepar is hyper in all its actions.

PATHOGENESIS
It produces enlargement of lymphatic glands, suppuration, ulcers, eczmatous eruptions, unhealthy skin and a condition of non-healing moist eruption on the folds of
skin. It acts on nerves and causes GREAT IRRITABILITY, OVERSENSITIVENESS AND HYPERSENSITIVENESS. Locally it has special affinity to respiratory mucus
membrane producing croupous catarrh and inflammation and profuse secretion.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Suited to torpid lymphatic constitution, persons with light hair and complexion; muscles are soft and flabby.

Temperament: Irritable temperament: easily excited, slightest cause irritates the patient.

Relation with heat and cold: Highly chilly patient.

Miasm: Mainly anti-psoric. But all the three miasms are covered by Hepar sulph.

Diathesis: Lymphatic and scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
. Chilly patient, highly sensitive to cold air. Imagines he can feel the air if a door is opened in the next room. Must be wrapped up to the face even in hot weather
(Psor.). Cannot bear to be uncovered (Nux—Cannot bear to be covered—Camphor, Secale cor.).
. The patient is very much OVERSENSITIVE BOTH PHYSICALLY AND MENTALLY. Very sensitive to touch. According to Nash, its strongest characteristic is HYPERSENSITIVENESS to touch, pain and cold air.
. Sweats profusely day and night without any relief, which is sour and offensive. Easily sweats on every mental or physical exertion.
. Sensation of a splinter, fish bone or plug in throat (Arg. nitricum, Nit. acid, Anacardium).
. Diseases where the system has been injured by abuse of mercury.
. All the discharges are very much sour e.g. vomiting, stool, sweat, etc.
. The slightest injury causes suppuration (Graphites, Silicea, Mercurius).onan
. The skin is very sensitive to touch. Cannot bear even clothes to touch the affected parts (Lachesis).
. In diseases where suppuration seems inevitable, Hepar may open the abscess and hasten the cure if applied in low potencies.
. Aggravation: From COLD IN GENERAL, cold air, cold food, uncovering the part.
.Amelioration: From WARMTH IN GENERAL; covering from head to foot, from warm food and drink; IN DAMP WET WEATHER.
. The patient has great CRAVING for sour things, vinegar, wine, acids and strong tasting foods. AVERSION to fatty food; dislike for all kinds of nourishment.

12. Mind : Mentally the patient is very much OVERSENSITIVE AND IRRITABLE. The slightest thing irritates him. Very much impulsive: Mother may have impulse
to throw the child into fire. Impulse to do violence and to destroy.The patient is quarrelsome; hard to get along with; nothing pleases him. Everybody
is disturbed, peevish, easily becomes angry even at least trifles. Anguish in the evening and night, with thoughts of suicide, very much anxious without any reason,
The patient is very quick in action. Hypochondriacal, sad and depressed.

.Aliments from : Abuse of mercury, quinine, suppressed eruption, cold in general, gonorrhoea and syphilis.

PARTICULARS
Headache :
Causation: Exposure to cold and suppressed eruption.
Location: One side of the head and right temple.

Character: Headache when shaking the head or riding. Boring pain every morning. Constant
pressive pain on one side as from a plug or nail. Scalp is very sore and sensitive to touch.

Modalities: Aggravation from cold and amelioration from warmth, covering and in DAMP WET WEATHER.

Concomitants: Vertigo with headache. Boils on the head and neck. Humid eruptions, feel very sore and of foetid odour; itching and burning and sore on scratching.

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Mouth : There is offensive odour from mc*ith. Gums and mouth are painfuil to touch; gums bleed easily. Ulcers in gums and mouth. Toothache after drinking cold things or opening the mouth. Toothache
better in a warm room, from biting teeth together.

Throat : Pressive and constructive sensation in throat. Stitches in the throat which extend to ear. Smarting soreness in throat, worse on swallowing. Sensation as if a fish bone or a splinter were
sticking in the throat. Also sensation of a plug or internal swelling in throat when swallowing.

Stomach : Putrid, bitter, sour, metallic taste arising from stomach. Eructation after eating. Stomach is painful on walking as if it were hanging loose. Frequent, but momentary attack of nausea, followed by
vomiting of bile every morning. Feeling of distension in pit of stomach. There is heaviness and pressure in stomach after a slight meal. Stiching pain in the region of liver when walking, coughing, breathing or
touching it. Colic with dry cough.

Stool : Stool is clay-coloured and soft; sour srneffing and white, containing undigested food particles. Although stool is not hard, it is expelled with great difficulty. Usually diarrhoeic stool with tenesmus.

Urine : Urine is dark and hot; burning, corroding the prepuce. Bladder is weak; flow impeded. Urine is voided slowly without force, drops vertically. Flow intermittent; cannot empty the bladder
thoroughly. The patient has to wait for a long time before he can pass urine (Nat. mur, Staph, Mur, acid).

Respiratory Symptoms :
Cough :
© Causation: From cold air and when any part of the body is uncovered.
¢ Sensation : With cough there is Splinter like sensation in throat as if a fish bone or plug is
sticking in the throat. The throat is very much sensitive to touch.

© Character of cough: Dry cough, deep, rough, barking, DRY, CROUPY COUGH WITH
CHOKING, gagging and with great soreness of chest.

* During cough: The patient goes on coughing and sweating. He coughs and sweats. There is much sweating without any relief.

Modalities: Cough is worse in the morning, from exposure to dry west wind, cold air, cold drinks, before mid-night and towards evening.
Amelioration by warmth and in damp wet weather.
Asthma :
Causation: After suppression of skin eruption.
Character: Breathing difficult, with rattling and wheezing sound in the chest. The patient has to take deep breath with threatened suffocation. 
Modality: The patient must bend head backwards and sit up which gives him temporary relief. Better in DAMP wet weather and by covering the body.

Skin :

Hepar sulph. is a great remedy for skin affection; whatever may be the name of the disease, such as eczema, itch, herpes, psoriasis, urticaria, acne, boils, abscess, rash, eruptions of all catogories. It has
unhealthy suppurating skin. EVERY LITTLE INJURY SUPPURATES (Sulphur, Graphites, Silicea). Theskin is very much sensitive and sore to touch. The skin and eruptions are so sensitive that the
patient cannot bear even the touch of the cloth. Eczema spreads by means of new pimples appearing justabove the old ones. Boils, abscesses and papules are prone to suppuration. Ulcers are very sensitive to
contact, easily bleeding, burning and stinging. Cannot bear to be uncovered; wants to be wrapped up warmly.
In ABSCESSES AND BOILS where suppuration is inevitable, Hepar, if given in high potency, aborts
the abscess and in low potency it hastens suppuration and heals quickly.

Hepar Sulph. is prepared by mixing Calcarea carb, and Sulphur. Its symptoms, however, show widerange of variations, in contrast to sulphur, particularly in relation to skin affections. Both of them are very
good remedies for skin troubles.Both have unhealthy skin and the eruptions suppurate but moresuppuration is found in Hepar, while severe scratching followed by burning is found in Sulphur. Hepar
skirt is highly sensitive: and sore to touch, even of cloth, but it is not so in Sulphur. Hepar is aggravatedby uncovering, whereas Sulphur is relieved by it. Sulphur is aggravated by heat of bed and washing but
Hepar is relieved by hot application and as such wants covering always. Dishcharges of Hepar arecorroding and smell like old cheese, which is not so in Sulphur. Hepar skin sweats profusely without any
telief, but Sulphur skin does not do so. Hepar has splinter-like pain, Sulphur has burning everywhere in its stead.

Comparison :
Between the two great suppurative medicines viz., Hepar and Silica.
The discharge of Hepar are very offensive. Hepar promotes and regulates suppuration in a remarkable manner (second only to Sil,), but is generally required at a stage earlier than Silica (Farrington).
But the genius of the two ‘remedies is dissimilar, because the modalities are poles apart. While Silica has in it, want of self-confidence, lack of “grit”, timidity, sufferings from anticipation as when having to appear
in public—Hepar is sensitive beyond all bounds of reason, irritable and impetuous, sensitive mentally and even subject to sudden murderous impulses.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: From cold air, uncovering, eating and drinking cold things, slightest draught of air, touching affected parts, abuse of Mercury, lying on painful side and in clear fine weather.
Amelioration: Warmth in general, from wrapping up and in damp wet weather (Medo., Nux vom., Causticum—rev. of Natrumsulph).
Relations :
Complementary to: Calendula in injuries of soft-parts.

Anfidofed by: Bell., Cham., Sil.
Antidotes : Nit. ac., lod., Calc. carb.

CHAPTER:112 HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS

Golden Seal BURT Ranunculaceae
Orange Root

INTRODUCTION

Hydrastis is a slow and deep acting remedy.The mother tincture is prepared from fresh root of the plant which is grown.abundantly in the United States of America. It is called “Yellow Root” or “Indian Turmeric” and thrives in various parts of India. It has got particular affinity for the LIVER AND GASTRIC AFFECTIONS resulting in poor digestion and obstinate constipation. The power of Hydrastis over SMALL POX is seen in modifying the disease, abolishing its distressing symptoms, shortening its course, lessening its severity and greatly mitigating its bad effects and completely protecting the patient from its dangerous consequence. This remedy is required in many trophic disturbances where there is emaciation, catarfhal condition and ulceration, even malignant ulcerations.

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Asthma, Cancer, Catarrh, Constipation, Corns, Dyspepsia, Ear affections, Fistula, Gonorrhoea, Gastric affections, Haemorrhoids, Jaundice, Liver affection,
Leucorrhoea, Throat troubles, Ulcer, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on mucous membrane, especially of respiratory tract, gastro-intestinal tract, glands, liver and skin.
PATHOGENESIS

Acting on mucous membrane, it relaxes them and produces a THICK, YELLOWISH, ROPY, AND STRINGY, VISCID SECRETION, particularly in the catarrhal conditions,
which may be anywhere from the body. It produces a malignant or CACHECTIC DYSCRASIA and also alters the course and severity of small-pox.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Hydrastis is specially suited to old, easily TIRED PEOPLE, cachectic persons with great debility and scrofulous constitution, which has been broken
down by alcoholism. The skin has a jaundiced look, mottled and puckered, with yellowish white colour of the face.

Temparament: Lymphatic temperament. Relation with heat and cold: Not so well marked.

Miasm: It covers all the three miasms viz. Psora, Syphilis and Sycosis.

Diathesis: Cancerous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Catarrhal condition and diseases- of various parts which are characterised by profuse, thick “YELLOWISH” ROPY AND STRINGY DISCHARGE from mucous membrane such as nose, throat, stomach, urethra, uterus, etc., (Kali bich., Bovista),
2. Cachectic or malignant dyscrasia with derangement of gastric and hepatic functions in persons broken down by excessive use of alcohol.
3. Cancer and pre-cancerous state, ulceration has taken place when pain is the principal symptom. Pains are knife like, sharp and cutting.
4. Cancers are hard and adherent, skin mottled and parched. Nipple retracted (Sars. Sil.).
5. Tongue large and flabby; shows imprint of teeth (Merc.sol., Chel., Podo.). Yellowish white in colour.
6. Constant empty aching “GONE FEELING” at stomach is a grand characteristic of Hydrastis.
7. Constipation is also a leading feature of Hydrastis. With constipation, there is constant pain in head and bad taste in mouth.
8. Leucorrhoea is ropy, thick, viscid and yellowish, hanging from os in long strings (Kali-bich., Bovista), with pruitus vulvae.
9. Profuse perspiration with unhealthy odour, especially in axillae and groin.
10. Intense backache is yet another great symptoms of this remedy.
11. Mind : Depressed mind due to prolonged suffering, weakness and debility. The patient ts sure of his death and he desries and prefers to die.
12. Ailments from : Abuse of mercury, chlorate of potash, alcoholism, ailments caused by syphilis and gonorrhoea.

PARTICULARS

Stomach :
Caused by alcoholism.
Sensation: Empty sinking feeling in the epigastrium.

Character: There is burning pain in stomach, with no appetite, weak digestion, atonic dyspepsia
and catarrhal condition. Nearly all food cause disorder of stomach, particularly bread and vegetables.
Enipty faint feeling is stomach with loathing of food; great weakness and prostration. Feeling of weight
in stomach long after taking food, with pulsation in the epigastrium. Chronic gastric ulcer or cancer with
burning pain.

Modality: Aggravation from food, particularly bread and vegetables.

Concomitants: Sour and yellowish, stringy vomiting, bitter taste in mouth. Dull frontal headache and
fulness of eyes.


Hydrastis Canadensis 

Liver :
Hydrastis is very useful in chronic inflammation of liver, jaundice, gall-stone colic with jaundice

Causation: Liver troubles are mainly due to excessive use of alcohol. Liver is enlarged, hard torpid and nodular, with deranged hepatic function. There is distress in the right hypochondrium. Skin is jaundiced with light or even white stool, showing absence of bile. Large, flabby, yellowish tongue; yellowish skin.

Modalities: Pain aggravated from motion and relieved by rest and also by passing flatus and by pressure.

Rectum -

There is obstinate piles with prolapse of rectum. Anus fissured. Inflammation of anus which causes contraction and spasm of the sphincter ani. Paresis of the rectum which results in most obstinate constipation with no desire for days together. Constipation with feeling of GONENESS in the stomach. Stool is hard and nodular. Smarting pain in anus during and after stool which lasts for a long time.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Hydrastis is indicated in chronic bronchitis, and the symptoms are as follows:-

Sensantion: There is rawness, soreness and burning in the chest.

Character of cough: Cough is dry hard with rattling .of mucus in the chest.

Character of sputa: There is expectoration of thick, YELLOWISH AND TENACIOUS MUCUS. Feeling of suffocation when lying on left side.
Aggravation from lying-on left side.

Concomitants: With cough there is profuse discharge of thick yellow, stringy mucus from nasal passage. Hawks yellow, viscid mucus from the posterior nares and fauces with ulceration.

Modality: Aggravtion from lying on left side (Phos).

Leucorrhoea :

There is THICK, YELLOWISH, ROPY, STRINGY AND VISCID LEUCORRHOEA, hanging from the os in long strings. There is chronic catarrhal condition of the vulva.
Leucorrhoea is worse after menses. It is offensive, acrid and excoriating. Excoriation and erosion of the cervix. Pruritus vulvae with sexual exicitement. Sore in vagina during coition. There is burning pain in vagina with soreness.

Modality: Aggravation after menses and coition.

Concomitants; Leucorrhoea is often associated with pruritus vulvae and sexual excitement.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From motion; skin symptoms by warmth.

Amelioration : By rest and pressure.

Relations :

Antidoes: Merc. Sol.
It is antidoted by: Sulphur.

CHAPTER :113  HYDROCOTYLE ASIATICA

Indian Pennywort BOILEAU Umbelliferae

CLINICAL

Acne. Elephantiasis. Eczema. Lupus. Leprosy. Pemphigus. Uterus-affection of. Pruritus, Vulvae. In Bengal this remedy goes by the name of “Thankuni”. The skin and the female generative organs are the chief seats of its action, though the liver, the nerves and the mucous membrane are also powerfully acted upon.

PARTICULARS

Skin :

A great variety of skin affections such as acne, eczema, pemphigus, lupus, leprosy, copper coloured eruption, papular eruption etc. have been cured with it. Great thickening of epidermoid layer and exfoliation of scales js the characteristic of this remedy which have let to its use in scrotal tumors as well as elephantiasis. It has considerable reputation in leprosy and lupus when there is no ulceraticn (Ulcerative stage : Calotropis). There is intolerable itching, especially of soles and profuse sweating.

Female Genital symptoms :

Hydrocot is of great use in fungus growths & granular ulceration on the upper lip & neck of =2 uterus. There is heat within vagina. Insupportable itching of the vagina is a characteristic indicaticr. Profuse leucorrhoea.

Compare :

Hoang Nan & Chaulmoogra, Hydrastis. Arsenic alb.





CHAPTER: 114 HYOSCYAMUS NIGAR

Henbane HAHNEMANN Solanaceae

INTRODUCTION

Hyoscyamus, one of the TRIO OF DELIRIUM, is also a gift of vegetable kingdom. Like Belladonna and Stramonium, Hyoscyamus too is poisonous in crude from. The fresh root of
the plant is used to prepare mother tincturewhen it possesses maximum medical powers. Poisoning, provings and _ experience of Hyoscyamus show its very definite range of
action as well as different striking resemblances to its natural relation with Belladonna and Stramonium from which it can easily be distinguished.
Hyoscyamus is said to be especially poisonous to fowls, hence the name, but for other animals, it acts like a purgative. Old school uses Hyoscyamus as a “Cerebral depressant” in acute mania, delirium tremens, febrile delirium and insomnia. It is mostly used by them in asylum practice.

CLINICAL

Angina Pecforis, Bronchitis, Brain affections, Chorea, Coma vigil, Cough, Delirum, Diarrhoea, Enteric fever, Epilepsy, Haemorrhage, Headache, Mania, Meningitis,
Neuralgia, Paralysis, Pneumonia, Urinary disorders etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Hyoscyamus acts upon the nervous system, sensorium, muscular system, mucous membrane and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

It irritates nerve centres, producing increased cerebral activity, but non- inflammatory in type, delirium, hysteria and delirium tremens. It also irritates mucous membranes and skin. Its pathogenetic action besides producing epilepsy, melancholia and mania also covers coma vigil. Non-inflammatory increase of cerebral activity may
also be noticed in a few cases. It produces a sensation of fulness and heat of the head with a flushed face without pronounced hyperaemia.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Like other members of the TRIO, Hyoscyamus too is more or less an acute drug and as such, consideration of constitution is not of much importance.
However, these patients are usually light-haired with pale or bluish face.

Temperament: Sanguine, irritable, nervous and hysterical temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient (Clarke).

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1 “Increased cerebral activity”, but of a non-inflammatory type can be noticed throughout this drug. Hyoscyamus has many points in common with Belladonna and Stramonium. Each one has got an individuality of its own. Hyoscyamus doeg not produce the intense cerebral congestion and inflammation of Belladonna, nor the intense maniacal delirium and sensorial excitement of Stramonium. In delirium too, Hyoscyamus occupies a place midway between Belladonna and Stramonium. Jt lacks.the constant cerebral congestion of the former and the fierce rage and maniacal delirium of the latter.

2. One peculiar symptom pre-eminently found in Hyoscyamus is “DESIRE TO UNCOVER”. The patient throws off the bed-clothes not because they are too warm, but because he will not remain covered. Wants to expose his body fully.

3. Another striking feature of Hyoscyamus is that the patient HAS NO WANTS AND MAKES NO COMPLAINTS. The patient ceases to complain of his symptoms; he is hot, does not desire to drink; does not know whether to take this or that, does not recognise those around him, he abuses them, makes irrelevant answers, wishes to run away, cries aloud or whines, but without being able to say why he is doing so.

4. Hyoscyamus is famous for its delirium. In delirium it has its own peculiar features. The non-inflammatory type of increased cerebral activity, ridiculous gestures and
display of a comical alienation of mind, and the horrible lascivious mania and the desire to remain uncovered are symptoms peculiar to Hyoscyamus alone.

5. The choreic symptoms of Hyoscyamus are well defined. Every muscle of the body twitches, from the eyes to the toes. There is a constant state of erethysm. Not a single
part of the whole body, or a solitary muscle is in a quiet state for a moment. Convulsive motions, spasm, both tonic and clonic, without consciousness, but with | restlessness are all characteristic of this drug.

6. Fear, suspicion and jealousy prevail always in a Hyoscyamus patient. (Lach..Puls., Rhus tox. Nux vom., Stram.). Fear of being alone; of being poisoned, of being
bitten, being sold. Suspects to eat or drink or to take what is offered; suspicious of some plot, of every body.

7. Intense sleeplessness of irritable, excitable persons, from embarrassment, often imaginary.

8. Mind : Hyoscyamus is a great remedy for distinct and characteristic mental symptprns which are as follows: Diseases with increased mental activity, but of a noninflammatory type: Such as hysteria, delirium tremens or delirium. The patient is very restless. Would not stay in bed. He jumps out of bed and tries to escape. Makes irrelevant answers and thinks that he is in the wrong place; behaves like a mad man; does foolish things; abuses those around him. Talks of imaginary doings, but has no wants and makes no complaints. Low muttering delirium, continues even while awake.The patient is very fearful. He is afraid of everything. FEAR of being alone; of being poisoned; of being bitten or sold. Fears to eat or drink, or to take what is offered.Anxious apprehension.Jealousy and suspicion run through the whole of this remedy. He suspects others of making some plot against him; being , poisoned; being injured etc.In Hyoscyamus, LASCIVIOUS MANIA is of the highest degree. The person will not be covered. Kicks off the clothes, immodesty; exposes the person. Sings obscene songs, lies completely naked in bed and chatters..He is inclined to laugh at everything; incoherent speech even followed by epilepsy. Silly expression and loquacity, cries and laughs alternately..Stupor and unconsciousness are well-marked in this drug. The patient does not reply or gives irrelevant answers. Does not recognise anyone. Sometimes answers properly, but stupor returns at once..Illusion and delusions of all senses. Sees persons who are not actually present there. Thinks he is in a wrong place.

9. Aliments from : Fear, fright, intestinal worms, unfortunate love, jealousy and rage.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Fear, fright, jealousy and rage.

Location: Headache is usually felt in the forehead.

Sensation: Swashing sensation in the brain.

Character: Pressing and stupefying pain in the forehead. Brain feels as if were loose. The patient

shakes the head to and fro or rolls head from side to side.

Modality: Aggravation at night, by mental affections, during menses and when lying down.

Concomitants: Confusion and vertigo as from intoxication, hiccough and dimness of vision.

Cough :

There is dry spasmodic cough, especially at night. The cough is worse and aggravated by lving down, but relieved by sitting up (Drosera, Belladonna, Croton tig., Rumex). Cough compels the Patient to sit up and when he does so, there is appreciable relief and the cough disappears. Cough is aggravated at night after eating, drinking, talking and singing.

Urine :

For paralysis of bladder after labour with subsequent retention or incontinence of urine. For no desire to urinate in lying-in woman, Hyoscyamus is an excellent remedy (Arn., Opium)

Fever :
.In Pneumonia, Broncho-pneumonia or even influenza which tunrs towards typhoid, its pecular mental symptoms and delirium are very valuable guides (see Mind).

.During fever, the sensorium is clouded; with staring eyes; grasping at flocks, and picking up of bed clothes. Subsultus tendinum and carphology are well marked.
Typhoid state may also prevail.

.Tongue is dry and unwieldy; dry or brown; cracked, parched and white; looks like burnt leather.

 Tongue paralysed; difficult speech. Tongue protruded wife difficulty, can hardly draw it in.

.Teeth are covered with sordes. Breath is offensive, putrid and bad taste in the mouth.

.The patient may also pass involuntary stool and urine.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In the evening and at night, from mental affections, from jealousy, unhappy love, cold air, from approach of menstruation, when lying down and from touch.

Amelioration : On stooping, from sitting (cough), motion, walking and warmth.

Relations : ,

Follows Belladonna well in deafness after apoplexy. After Hyoscyamus, Phosphorous often cures lasciviousness. Nux or Opium, in haemoptysis of drunkards.

Antidoted by: Vinegar, Belladonna, Camphor, Cinchona, Stram. Hyoscyamus antidotes Belladonna, Plumbum, Stram.

Remedies following well: Bell., Puts., Stram., Ver. alb.

Comparison Belladonna Hyoscyamus

1. Onset Sudden and violent. Gradual.
2. Delirium Violent and furious. Low muttering.
3. Mania Violent and furious. Lascivious.
4. Fever High rise of temperature. Low grade, temperature.
5. Face Red. Pale or bluish.
6. Melancholia Not marked. Well marked.
7. Suspicion and jealousy Not present. Well marked.
8. Jerking of muscles Not much. Every muscle jerks.
9. Throbbing of carotids Present. Not present.
10. Physical weakness Not found. Well marked.
11. Typhoid state Not present. Present.

CHAPTER:115 HYPERICUM

t. John’s Wort C. HERING Hypericaceae

INTRODUCTION

Hypericum is a remedy from the vegetable kingdom. The plant grows well in Europe, Asia and Africa. The mother tincture is perpared from the whole blooming plant.

CLINICAL

Bruises, Fractures, Corns, Diarrhoea, Headache, Paralysis, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Sciatica, Spinal irritation, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its action directly influences spinal cord, brain and the whole nervous system.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes irritation of spinal cord and nerves producing vesicular erethysm and congestion.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Hypercium is suited to mechanical injuries of spinal cord, bad effects of spinal concussion and pains after fall on coccyx.

. It is especially suited for injuries of PART RICH IN SENTIENT NERVES.

. Punctured wounds or injuries from treading on nails.

. It prevents lock-jaw as in tetanus.

. It preserves integrity of torn and lacerated parts when almost seperated from the body (Calendula).

. For all consequences of bad effects from shock, fright or mesmerism, Hypericum is a good remedy.

. It modifies and arrests ulceration, sloughing and tetanus after traumatic injuries.

. Vertigo with sensation, as if, the head became suddenly elongated with urging to urinate.

. Headache after a fall on coccyx with sensation as if being lifted up into the air.

. Bunions and corns with severe excruciating pain showing involvement of nerves.

. Convulsion after blow on head or concussion.

. Ailments from : Mechanical injuries of spinal cord, spinal concussion, fall on coccyx, injuries of any kind, rat bites.

PARTICULARS

Injury :
Hypericum is an excellent remedy for injuries involving NERVES, the symptoms of which are as

follows:-
Causation: Injuries are caused by mechanical affections of spinal cord, bad effects of spinal concussion, pains after a fall on coccyx. Punctured, incised or lacerated wounds, whidh are very sore and painful. Injuries from nails, needles, rat-bites, with severe pain as from splinters. Injuries of parts which are RICH IN SENTIENT NERVES, such, as fingers, toes, matrices of nails, palms and soles, having intolerable pain, indicating that nerve are severely involved.Nervous depression following wounds or surgical operation. It also removes bad effects of shock, fright or mesmerism.Hypericum is capable of modifying and sometimes arresting ulceration and sloughing (Calendula); crushed and smashed finger tips or tetanus after traumatic injuries. Hypericum also can preserve the integrity of a torn and lacerated member when it is almost entirely separated from the body.Convulsion and spasm after injury, blow or concussion, especially of head. Excessive pain and.soreness of the affected parts. Violent pain and inability to walk or stoop. Feeling of weakness and trembling of all the limbs and numbness and cramping feeling.Spine is very sensitive to touch after a fall; slight touch of arms or neck causes severe pain and the patient screams and cries with pajn.

Headache :

There is severe headache after a fall upon coccyx. During headache, there is sensation as if being lifted up high into the air and consequently there is a great anxiety of falling from the height.

Vertigo :

Vertigo with sensation as if the head suddenly became elongated; especially at night with urging to urinate.

For bunions and corns (Antim crud., Ran. bulb.), with severe excruciating pain, showing involvement of nerves, Hypericum is a gret remedy.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In cold dampness; in fog, in a closed room, least exposure, touch.

Amelioration: Bending head backwards.

Relations :
Compare: Arnica, Calendula, Ruta, Staph. In wounds where formerly Aconite and Arnica were given alternately, Hypericum cures.

Antidoted by: Arsenic.

Antidotes: Sulphur.

CHAPTER:116 IGNATIA AMARA


IGNATIA AMARA

St. Ignatius’ Bean HAHNEMANN Loganiaceae

INTRODUCTION

Ignatia is famous as “a REMEDY OF GREAT CONTRADICTIONS”. It is A WOMEN REMEDY, and is the “feminine” of “masculine” Nux-vomica. The deep insight of Hahnemann penetrated into the curative value of this very useful drug. All the leading physicians, from time to time, were undoubtedly unanimous about its very contradictory nature as verified in the daily practices but for every true practitioner this is an indispensable remedy. The full implication of the numerous contradictory symptoms of the drug on one hand and those of the actual disease on the other, for which this remedy is aptly used with sure success, can hardly be understood by any person without exercising his prudence. Still the utility of the remedy has been well recognised by one and all, in their own way through daily practice.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Anxiety, Appetite, Chorea, Convulsion, Constipation, Croup, Debility, Genital organs, Epilepsy, Flatulence, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Heart affection,
Hysteria, Intermittent fever, Locomotor ataxia, Menstrual disorders, Melancholia, Numbness, Paralysis, Sleep, Throat and respiratory troubles, ete.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Ignatia’s domain of action is predominantly on entire nervous system, especially medulla oblongata, spinal cord and consequently the whole nervous system.

PATHOGENESIS

It acts especially on medulla oblongata and spinal nervous system, producing convulsion, spasm, chorea, hysteria and dyspnoea; intense acuteness of nerves resulting
in HYPERAESTHESIA, EMOTIONAL DISTURBANCES. INCOORDINATION AND VARIOUS CONTRADICTORY SYMPTOMS.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Dark looking lady, with dark hair and dark complexion.

Temperament: Nervous temperament, VERY SENSITIVE, easily excited, quick in Perception and rapid in execution.

Relation with heat and cold: No definite stamping can be made on this aspect due to the contradictory nature of the drug. The patient is, however, affected by cold, pain, touch, odour, noise, etc.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

It is a remedy of great contradiction, such as, 

(a) Roaring in ears relieved by music,

(b) Sore throat relieved by swallowing solid,

(c) Liquid is more painful than solid to swallow,

(d) Cough is aggravated by more coughing,

(e) Cough more on standing, less or nil on walking,
 
(f) Empty feeling in the stomach not relieved by eating, 

(g) Piles relieved when walking, 

(h) Piles protrude when the stool is soft, but not during hard stool,
 
(i) Prolapse of anus with soft stool, 

(j) Spasmodic laughter from grief instead of weeping, 

(k) Sexual desire with impotency.
 
(1) Thirst during chill and heat without thirst. Red face during chill, pale during heat .

(m) Relieved by external heat and aggravated hoovering,
 
(n) Mental conditions suddenly change from joy to sorrow and vice versa.

ltw1ltw1Long involuntary sighing.

Hypersensitiveness to all external impressions, such as pain, touch, odour, noise,etc. Pain, on a small spot that can be covered with the tip of a finger (Kali. bich,).
All symptoms are caused and aggravated by tobacco. There is utter inability to TOLERATE TOBACCO IN ANY FORM.There is sweat on face or on the tip of the nose on a small spot only while eating.Desire for cold food, acid things, onion, fruit, bread, butter, great variety of undigestible things and wants to be alone. Aversion to work, meat, milk, warm food,open air and mental exertion.

Mind : Ignatia patient develops peculiar mental conditions which are as follows:-

Mental symptoms are caused by ill effects of bad news, fright, anger, grief, vexation, disappointed love, suppressed sexual desire, reserved displeasure and a feeling of
shame and mortification. There is RAPIDLY CHANGING mental condition from laughing to weeping; from joy to sorrow, one moment excessively happy, the next moment in rage, etc.

The patient broods in solitude over imaginary troubles; full of suppressed grief. Involuntary sighing (Lachesis, Calc. phos.).

Desires, tobe alone, MOODY. Taciturn, sad, melancholic and indifferent.There is weakness of memory. Unreasonable; howls and cries; slightest fault finding or contradictions excite anger; very short-tempered patient. jgnatia Amara  Finely sensitive mood and delicate conscience. Inconsistent, impatient, irresolute and quarrelsome. Good-natured when well, but quickly disturbed by slightest emotion and easily offended. Persons physically and mentally exhausted by long CONTINUED AND
CONCENTRATED GRIEF. There is great anxiety as if some unpardonable crime has been committed by her.Fearful and timid; busy and restless. Commits mistakes on talking and writing.Child when reprimanded, scolded, or sent to bed, gets sick and has convulsion in sleep (Cham., Staph.). Consolation aggravates all troubles (Hell., Nat. mur., Lil. tig., Silicea, Sepia).

9. Ailments from : Anger, grief, disappointed love, fear, jealously, suppressed sexual desire, bad news, vexation with reserved displeasure, suppressed mental suffering
   from shame and mortification, TOBACCO, coffee, tea and alcohol.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: From TOBACCO, anger, grief, sorrow, bad news and suppressed mental sufferings.

Character of pain: There is congestive and throbbing headache. Heavy headache as if a nail was driven through the side, relieved by lying on it. Throbbing pain at occiput with every beat of heart.

Modalities: Headache is worse on stooping, jar and motion by SMOKING OR SMOKING

TOBACCO worse when pressing for stool relieved by lying on painful side and by profuse urination (Gels
, Silicea, Sanguinaria, Ver. alb.).-

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : While talking or chewing bites inside of cheek. Stitching pain in the palate, extending to ear. Toothache from drinking coffee or from tobacco smoking, sour test in mouth.

Stomach : Empty feeling in the pit of stomach, not relieved by eating. Sinking in stomach relieved by taking deep breath. There is sweat on face or on the tip of the nose on a small spot only while eating, Cramps in stomach. All-gone sensation in the stomach, with much flatulence and hiccough; worse from touch, contact, jar and motion, flatulent colic; desire for stool felt in the epigastrum. (Ver. alb.). Sour
eructation.

Constipation : Obstinate constipation in habitual coffee drinkers from carriage riding; desire for stool felt in the upper abdomen. Excessive urge and desire for stool; but there is great pain in rectum which compels the patient to refrain from going to closet. There may be prolapse of anus from moderate Straining, lifting or stooping. PROLAPSE OF ANUS IS MORE WHEN THE STOOL IS LOOSE.

Haemorrhoids : Piles protrude with every soft stool, not with hard stool; have to be replaced, better by walking. Sharp stitching pain in the anus which shoots up to rectum. Pain remains for hours after stool Pain in small circumscribed spot. (Kali. bich.).




Respiratory symptoms :

Throat and cough : Sore throat. Liquid is more painful than solid sensation of a lump in throat, not relieved by swallowing There is stitching pain in throat, extending to ears, worse during deglutition

The tonsils are inflammed and swollen. Coughing increases the desire to cough. Cough is more at rest and less or nil during walking Dry, hollow, and spasmodic cough worse in the evening with little expectoration. There is desire to take deep breath. Hysterical cough and vomiting are cured by Ignatia.

Intermittent fever : Fever paroxysm comes with marked periodicity. Fever comes exactly at the same hour every day. In fever, the face is red during chill; pale during heat; also there is great thirst during chill stage of fever (Apis) and no thirst in heat stage; there is great yawning and stretching before the attack of fever.

Modalities: Aggravation by covering and relieved by external heat.

Convulsion :
 Causation: From grief, anger, bad news, SUPPRESSED MENTAL FEELING. etc.

Character: There is trembling and jerking when falling asleep: spasm of single muscle, limb or whole body. Stiffness of the neck muscles with tingling in the limbs.
Menses :
Time: Too early.
Quantity: Too profuse.
Character of blood: Menstrual blood is black clotted with putrid offensive odour.
Concomitants: There is violent labour-like pain, followed by purulent corrosive leucorrhoea. Menses
may sometimes be suppressed by grief.
General modalities :

Aggravation: From tobacco, coffee, alcohol, contact, touch, motion, strong odour, mental emotion, grief, anger and suppressed mental sufferings.

Amelioration: Warmth, hard pressure, swallowing, walking.

Relations :
Ignatia, bears the same relation to the diseases of women that Nux does to sanguine, bilious men.
Natrum mur., is the chronic of Ignatia in the mental plane.
Antidotes: Coffea, Cham.
Antidoted by: Puls., Arn., Camphor, Cham., Cocc., Coffea.

Incompatible to: Coffea. Nux. v., Tuberculinum.

CHAPTER : 117 IODUM

Iodine HAHNEMANN The Element

INTRODUCTION

It is a drug proved and recorded in chronic diseases by Hahnemann, who speaks of it as a heroic medicine, even when employed in the highest
potency. Iodine, belongs to a family of Halogens, others being Chlorine, Bromine and Fluorine. If atall a student wants to remember lodum in rhymes,
the following few lines may be helpful.

“Ravenous Iodine howls for her dinner,
Eats much sand eats often, but only grows thinner,Her phenomenal meals she’s ever repeating,
Because all her Symptoms are better by eating,She is fidgety, fearful, unable to rest;
While, she eats, while she wkfqalks, in the cold, she feels best Air her glands (save the mammae) congested appear, With corrosive, destructive to clothes leucorrhoea.”

CLINICAL

Appetite disordered, Atrophy, Brain affection, Constipation, Consumption, Cough,Debility, Diarrhoea, Diptheria, Goitre, Glandular affection, Headache, Heart affection,
Jaundice, Laryngitis, Leucorrhoea, Liver affection, Menstrual disorders, Pneumonia,
Rheumatism, Rickets, Throat and lung affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

lodum especially acts on all the glandular system, lymph glands, thyroid, liver.
spleen, breasts, ovaries, testes, salivary glands, etc. Mucus membrane of eyes, nose.
respiratory tract and even blood vessels are not spared from its action.

PATHOGENESIS

When acting on the glandular system, it leads to HYPERTROPHY, ENLARGEMENT AND INDURATION, EXCEPTING THE BREASTS WHICH DWINDLE AND ATROPHY. The hypertrophy of glands is at the expense of muscles, generalised get Constricted, vaso-constriction, capillary congestion followed by oedema, ecchymosis
haemorrhage and nutritive disturbances.



CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Persons of dark or black hair and eyes with a low cachectic condition. Profound debility and GENERAL EMACIATION overgrown body with hypertrophy and induration of gland.

Temperament: Irritable temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Very HOT PATIENT, RATHER he is the HOTTEST patient. ‘

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Scroufulous diathesis with glandular enlargement. Tubercular diathesis,

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Ravenous hunger; feels relieved while eating and after eating.

2. Losing flesh while eating well (Abrot., Nat. mur., Tuber.).

3. All glands of the body are HYPERTROPHIED AND ENLARGED EXCEPT THE MAMMARY GLAND.

4, All the symptoms are WORSE FROM WARMTH in general and better from cold in general e.g. cold air.

5. Profound debility and loss of breath on going upstairs.

6. Discharges are acrid and corrosive ».g. foot-sweat, leucorrhoea, etc.

7. Pulsation all over the body e.g. stomach, back, even arms and fingers.

8. Sensation of constriction and squeezing, especially in heart.

9. Intense restlessness with apprehension.

10. Mind : The lodum patient is very much weak in mind; forgetfrul, cannot remember a little thing. He forgets what he was about to say or to do. The forgetfulness is
extensive. There is great anxiety, especially when quiet, with depression. The patient must keep himself busy. Though mentally exhausted, he is compelled to keep busy and continue the work. Again there is Sudden impulse to do some violence; he wants to do something hurriedly; he has impulse to kill. In this it is very closely related to Aresenic, Hepa® and Natrum Sulph.—all these have got impulse to murder without any cause but the difference is in sensitiveness to heat. While lodum is very warm blooded, others are always chilly.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Stomach : Throbbing pain at the pit of stomach. Empty eructation day and night as if every particle of food were turned into air (Kali carb.). Indigestion from over-eating with much flatulence, sour eructation and belching. jodum There is RAVENOUS HUNGER, suffers from hunger; must eat every few hours; anxious and worried w1bd268bd268ltw1 if he does not eat; feels relieved while eating or after eating and when stomach Is full (Anacardium, Chelidonium, Psorinum, Sepia).

Respiratory System :

Throat : Enlarged thyroid Goitre with sensation of the constriction. Sub-maxillary glands are

swollen.

Caugh : Dry type of cough with wheezing afd sawing respiration, sensation of itching low down in the lungs, behind the sternum causing cough, extends through bronchi to nasal cavity, inspiration difficult, croupy cough, tickling all over the chest.

* Modality: Aggravation from indoors, in warm, wet weather and when lying on back.

* Concomitants: With cough there is palpitation of heart. Croupy cough is found in fleshy 

children. :

Pneumonia :

 Stage: lodum is ideally suited to the hepatisation stage of pneumonia.

 Location: Right side of lung affected.

 Character: Dry type of cough with wheezing and sawing respiration, with high fever. Itching low down in lungs, behind the sternum with blood-streaked sputum. Dyspnoea.

 Modality: Aggravation from warmth, wet weather, when lying on back.

Heart : Hypertrophy of the heart; myocarditis, painful compression around the heart.

Sensation: As if the heart was squeezed together, as if grasped with an iron hand (Cactus) followed by weakness.
Great palpitation from least exertion. There is also great weakness and loss of breath on going
upstairs (Calcarea carb.).

 Modality: Aggravation from least exertion on going upstairs.

Menses :

Irregular type of menses with uterine haemorrhage. There may ne cancerous degeneration of cervix.

Uterus is enlarged with tedency to menorrhagia. There is wedge-like pain from ovary to uterus. Swelling and induration of uterus and ovaries.

Leucorrhoea :

Time: At the time of menses.

Quantity: Profuse and abundant.

Character: Thick, slimy, acrid, corrosive, staining and corroding the linen, Leucorrhoea with swelling and induration of cervix. The Leucorrhoea js thick, slimy and sometimes bloody. Leucorrhoea is most abundant at the time of menses, rendering things sore and corroding the clothes.

Glandular System :

Hypertrophy of all glands of the body, except the breasts. Hypertrophy runs through the whole remedy.

There is enlargement of liver, spleen, ovaries, testes, lyrriphatic glands, cervical glands, i.e. all sorts of glands, except mammary glands, The mammae dwindle while all other glands become enlarged, hard




and nodular. This enlargement is mostly found in the lymphatic system, especially of abdomen and mesenteric glands.

lodum Baby : Especially suited to those children who are dark and have black hair and eyes. The baby is VERY HOT, rather the HOTTEST BABY, there is aggravation from warmth 
in general. Baby has scrofulous diathesis. All glands of the body are enlarged. There is hypertrophy and induration of glandular tissues, e.g., thyroid, testes, liver, 

spleen, lymph nodes of the abdomen, etc.

The baby has ravenous hunger; suffers from hunger, must eat every few hours. Anxious and worried if ihe does not eat. Feels relieved while eating and when stomach is full.

The baby suffers from MARASMUS in spite of continuous eating. Great emaciation, progressively increasing. The baby eats freely and will yet lose flesh all the time. There 

is withering throughout the baby.The muscles dwindle. The skin shrinks and wrinkles and the face of the baby looks like that of an old person; but glands under the arm and 

groin are enlarged and hard.The baby suffers from a bad type of constipation. The stool is of clay-coloured or white; constipation is relieved by drinking cold milk. There 

is also dry type of cough; child grasps the larynx while coughing.

General modalities :

Aggravation: Warmth, wrapping up the head. Motion and exertion of all kinds aggravate.

Amelioration: Walking about in open air, by eating.

Relations :
Complementary to: Lycopodium. Acts best in goitre when given after full moon or when the moon is waning—Lippe. Should not be given during lying in period, except in high potencies—Hering.

It Antidotes: Antim. tart., Apis., Ars., Bell., Camph., Hepar, Phos., Sul., Merc.

Follows well: Merc., Hepar., Ars.

Followed well by: Acon., Arg.n., Calc. carb., Kali, bich., Merc., PhoS ,PLUS. 


CHAPTER :118

IPECACUANHA

Ipecac HAHNEMANN Rubiaceae

INTRODUCTION

Ipecacuanha is an interesting drug standing on the ceasefire line between the absolutely opposite ways of therapeutics. Old school usuallystudies, experiments with and uses drug for their physiological actions and lays down maximum non-lethal doses for adults and children, while Homoeopathy uses them for their exactly opposite effect and in dynamic dose for vital stimulation. Ipecac is interesting as being one of the drugs that Allopathy uses to cure Homoeopathically. It is used in both ways, in fact
to PROVOKE AND TO CURE VOMITING. According to Hahnemann Ipecac is a short acting medicine.

CLINICAL

Anaemia, Asthma, Bone affection, Chorea, Convulsion, Constipation, Colic, Cough,Diarrhoea, Deafness, Dysentery, Eye affection, Fever, Gall-stone colic, Gastric ulcer,
Haematemesis, Haemorrhage, Menstrual disorders, Nausea and vomiting, Pregnancy disorders, Stomach disorders, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The chief action is on the ramification of the pneumogastric nerve, on medulla oblongata, on mucous membrane of respiratory and gastro-intestinal tract and arterial
vascular system.

PATHOGENESIS

When acting on pneumogastric nerve, it produces spasmodic irritation in chest and stomach, the former gives rise to ASTHMA and latter to NAUSEA AND VOMITING.
When acting on mucus membrane, it produces a catarrhal condition, pulmonary congestion, even hepatisation, nausea and vomiting.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: It is especially suited to stout persons of lax fibre; fair people; women and children; emphysematous persons; persons who have a history of epistaxis
and other forms of blood loss. Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Temperament: Irritable temperament.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Haemorrhagic diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Most of its acute complaints commence with NAUSEA and VOMITING or all complaints requiring Ipecac are attended more or less with nausea. Nausea constant, continuous and persistent with or without vomiting. Nausea not relieved by vomiting. Thirstlessness runs through the whole drug (Nux-mos., Puls., Aethusa, Gels., Apis). Clean tongue (Cina) with much saliva, but no thirst.

4 Bright red haemorrhage from natural orifices like nostrils, mouth and especially from uterus.

5. Oppressed breathing especially with respiratory and/or gastric complaints. Anxiety about the stomach is very much prominent.

6. Cold sweat on forehead (Carbo veg., Ver. alb.).

7. Wheezing and rattling of chest without expectoration especially in respiratory troubles of earlyistage (late stage rattling, Antim tart.).

8. Desire for sweets and dainties. Aversion to all food.

9. Mind : The person is irritable and short tempered. Full of desire for many things

10.out which he knows nothing, in other words, desire for a number of things without knowing exactly what it is and what it is for. The person is very much oversensitive, cannot endure east noise. Children cry, howl and scream continuously without any cause.

Ailments from : Undigestible food, raisins, cakes, anger, reserved displeasure, injuries, suppressed eruption, quinine.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : Clean tongue with no thirst.
Copious secretion of saliva; constantly obliged to swallow saliva, Often indicated in salivation during

pregnancy.

Stomach : Should be thought of in ALL DISEASES WHICH COMMENCE OR ARE ATTENDED WITH continuous and persistent nausea and even vomiting but without any relief to the patient such as, in gastritis, cholera, abdominal pain, dysentery, bronchitis, pneumonia, asthma and intermittent fever etc. In such symptoms Ipecac tops the list.

Modality: Nausea not relieved by vomiting; vomiting of white glairy mucus in Jarge quantities or of green jelly like mucus.


Ipecacuanha 335_

Diarrhoea :

Causation: Undigestible food, raisins, cakes, anger and suppressed eruptions.

Character of stool: “Green mucus, as green as grass, but black stool looking like frothy molasses also indicates this remedy occasionally.

Concomitants: Colicky pain around umbilicus with nausea, clean tongue and no thirst. Asiatic cholera where nausea and vomiting predominate, with clean tongue and no thirst. The patient becqmes drowsy and sleepy after vomiting (Aeth), aggravation from slightest-motion.

Colic :

Causation: Flatulent colic, gall-stone colic.

Location: Colic around the region of navel, cutting pain across abdomen as from a knife, goes from left to right.

Sensation: Cutting pains, gripping pains as though intestine were tightly grasped with hands.

Concomitants: Nausea, vomiting, clean tongue and no thirst.

Respiratory system :

Pneumonia : Most of the symptoms are indicated in early stage ot the disease with all general characteristic symptoms of pneumonia. Pneumonia of infants. In infantile pneumonia chest loaded with mucus, rapid wheezing respiration, blueness of skin and pale face. Although the chest seems full of phlegm, and there is so much of fine rattling, the phlegm does not seem to yield to cough. Cough causes nausea and vomiting. There may be wheezing with threatened suffocation.

Asthma : Spasmodic form of attack, with violent contraction and constriction in throat and chest. Threatened suffocation from constriction. Wheezing is present, nothing is expectorated.

* Modality: Aggravation by motion.

* Concomitants: With nausea vomiting, clean tongue and no thirst.Cough. Cough is dry, spasmodic, constricted and asthmatic. Incessant and violent with every breath.

Whooping cough : Child loses breath, turns pale or blue in face, stiff; strangling with gagging and vomiting of mucus, bleeding from nose and mouth. Every fresh attack sets in with a long-drawn difficult, howling and sighing inspiration.

Haemorrhage : Ipecac is a GREAT HAEMORRHAGIC REMEDY. Bleeding from all orifices of the body, from uterus, bowels, kidney, stomach, nose, lungs, etc. Character of the blood is profuse and steady flow of BRIGHT RED BLOOD.

Concomitants: Nausea, oppressed breathing, thirstlssness and clean tongue.

Bones :

Bones of skull feel bruised; Pain enters from teeth and root of tongue. Pains as if bones were all torn into pieces (Lac can, Tuber). Pains as from a bruise in all the bones. :

Intermittent fever : Ipecac is indicated almost in all cases of malaria if symptoms tally. Causation: Malarial fever drugged with quinine and arsenic. Relapses with irregularities and indiscretion in diet.

Before chill: Yawning, stretching and waterbrash in mouth. Chill; Short chill, chill more in warm room, from external heat.




* During Chill: Icy coldness of hands and feet; redness of one cheek and paleness of the other. Prostration, lassitude and weakness, most pronounced chill.

* Heat: Long lasting with nausea, vomiting with or without oppressed breathing.

Sweat: Sour sweat mainly on upper part of the Body (quantity of sweat is profuse only if quinine had been abused),

N.B. When indications are not sharp, or when a case does not present itself with a well defined symptomatic featurejperac serves to clear up the case and paves the way to some other remedy, the symptoms of which will then manifest themselves.

General Modalities : 

Aggravation: Periodically, winter, dry weather and least motion.

Amelioration : By rest, pressure and closing eyes.

Relations :


Complementary to: Cuprum met.

Compare: With Antim. tart, Ipecac has more nausea, clean tongue, but Antim. tart, has mere retching and vomiting and thick coated tongue.

It antidotes: Arn., Ars., Nux vom.

Antidoted by: Alum., Apis., Arn., Ars., Dulc., Ferrum., Op., Sulph., Ant. tart.


CHAPTER: 119 KALI BICHROMICUM

Potassium Bichromate DRYSDALE K,Cr,0,


INTRODUCTION

Potassium bichromate—readily available from mineral kingdom has attained a position in the Homoeopathic Materia Medica because of some very marked and characteristic features, all its own. The effect of the drug on the entire human economy shows profound reaction and produces some keynote characteristics which are of utmost value to the prescriber, rendering the drug one of the most important members of the Homoeopathic Materia Medica.

CLINICAL

Abdominal and stomach disorders, Anaemia, Asthma, Bronchitis, Bone affection, Catarrh, Cough, Constipation, Diphtheria, Dyspepsia, Exostosis, Eye affection, Fever,
Gout, Headache, Lung affection, Neuralgia, Nose affection, Pain, Peptic ulcer, Rheumatism, Skin troubles, Throat and Ulcers, Vomiting, Warts, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts mainly on the mucous membrane, skin, glands, kidney, fibrous tissue and periosteum. :


PATHOGENESIS

It is an irritant of mucous membrane causing erosion, ulceration and SECRETING TOUGH AND STRINGY DISCHARGES a hallmark of the remedy. Mucous membranes
especially acted upon, are those of the respiratory and alimentary tracts. Kidneys, when affected, show congestion and inflammation. Urine becomes albuminous. Skin, just like mucous membrane, ulcerates discharging the characteristic discharge with papules and pustules. Periosteum is congested and inflamed. Nasal septum may be totally destroyed.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up : Fatty persons having light hair, fine complexion and suffering from catarrhal affections, Babies are fat, chubby and Short necked (Long neck, Nat.
mur.), disposed to croup and croupy affections,

Relation with heat and cold ; Chilly patient.

Miasm. It covers all the three miasms, but especially syphilis is in the background.



GUIDING SYMPTOMS

Discharges from mucous membrane and skin are TOUGH, STRINGY WHICH ADHERE TO THE PARTS AND CAN BE DRAWN INTO LONG STRINGS (Hydrastis, Bovista).Pain in small spots that can be covered with the tip of a finger (Ign., Lil.tig.).

Shifting pain runs through the whole of Kali bich., which is the keynote symptom of the drug. Flying character of the pain (Puls., Lac. can), rapidly shifts from one place
to another, goes from side to side sometimes here and sometimes there. Pain comes suddenly and disappears suddenly (Bell., Ign., Mag. phos.).

. Desire for beer, acids. Aversion to meat, water, to rise from bed, to move about. Oedematous bladder-like appearance of uvula, (Rhus tox., Apis).

There is pressive pain in root of nose.

. Discharge of plugs, “clinkers”.

. Rheumatism alternates with gastric symptoms. Rheumatism alternating with

dysentery (Abrot.) calls for this remedy.

Spottiness, stringiness and yellowishness mark the remedy.

Sexual desire absent in plethoric people.

11. Kali bich. patient is generally chilly, yet his symptoms occur and aggravate in hot summer weather, such as skin disease, rheumatism, dysentery, etc.

12. Mind : ill humoured, low spirited and indifferent. Easily excited. Anxiety arises from chest, with distress in stomach.

13. Ailments from : Alcohol, beer, hot weather, autumn and spring.

PARTICULARS
Headache :


Causation ; From suppressed catarrh. Before headache, there is blurred vision or preceded by bnlindness (Gels., Nat. mur.)

Character of headache: Shifting pain from one place to another; pain comes-suddenly and goes suddenly. Pain in small spot that can be covered with the tip of a finger.

Modalities: Aggravation from light and noise; amelioration by lying down.

Concomitant: Sight returns as headache increases.

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Gastric complaints generally peptic ulcers i.e. gastric and duodenal ulcer.

Causation: Bad effects of beer, alcohol.

Sensation: Weight in the pit of stomach, with loss of appetite and great flaulence.




Character of ulcers: Punched out ulcer of stomach with pain in small spots which can be covered with the tip of a finger; shifts rapidly from one part to another, appears and disappears suddenly.

There is great desire for beer and acids.

Modality: Aggravation after eating.

Concomitants: With the above symptoms there is VOMITING OF ROPY, STRINGY MUCUS AND BLOOD. Gastric symptoms alternate with rheumatism.

Stool :

 Character: Dysentery with jelly-like mucus, great tenesmus. Stool is brown, ropy and stringy. Dysentery alternates with rheumatism.

 Modality: Aggravation in the morning and by taking beer.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Nose : Pressive pain in root of nose:

Sinusitis : Septum is ulcerated, - with foetid smell, inability to breathe through the nose. Inflammation of frontal sinus with stopped up sensation and loss of Smell.

Character of discharge: Discharge of plugs, tough, ropy, free, fluid mucus in clear masses and has violent pain fromocciput to forehead.

Throat : In diphtheria, when fauces are red and inflamed; pseudo-membranous deposit on soft palate; tonsillitis. The attack is prone to extend downwards to larynx and

trachea. Uvula swollen, oedematous, of bladder like appearance, much swelling but little redness. (Uvula of Rhus tox. is also oedematous but with redness).

Cough : Character of Cough: Violent, rattling cough with gagging and Vomiting.

Cough with expectoration of TOUGH, ROPY AND STRINGY DISCHARGED MUCUS WITH DYSPNOEA.

 Modalities: Aggravation when undressing and on sitting up. Amelioration by lying down.

Concomitants: With cough there is pain in chest in small spot that can be - covered with the tip of a finger; shifting pain, appears and disappears suddenly,

Rheumatism :
Causation: Syphilitic rheumatism.

Sensation: Tearing sensation in the tibia, with swelling and stiffness of joints.

Character of pain : WANDERING PAINS; pains, fly rapidly from one-place to another; pain comes suddenly and goes suddenly; pain in small spots which can be Covered wfith the tip of a finger.

 Modality: Aggravation from cold and from motion.

Concomitants: Rheumatism alternates with gastric symptoms, one appearing in the fall and the ether in the spring.


Skin :

Punched out edges of skin, .with papular and pustular eruptions and itching. The discharge is ROPY AND STRINGY.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From beer, morning, hot weather and undressing.

Amelioration: Skin symptoms are better in cold weather, by lying down.

Relations :
Compare: Hepar and lodum in croupy affections.

It antidotes: Merc., Merc. iod.

Antidoted by: Ars., lach., Puls.


Follows well: After lodum in croup when hoarse cough, with tough membrane. general weakness and coldness are present. Calcarea is to be thought of in acute or chronic nasal catarrh after Kali bich. Antim tart, follows well.in catarrhal affection and skin diseases.

CHAPTER :120 

KALI BROMATUM

Potassium Bromide K Br

INTRODUCTION

Potassium Bromide occurs as a colourless or white odourless or white cubical crystals or granules. It is odourless and has a pungent saline taste. It abates all forms of nervousness,fidgetiness or even spasms and creates a tendency to mental calm and indifference.The greater part of the pathogenesis of this drug is made of symptoms observed in Allopathic overdosing though it has been proved.

CLINICAL

Acne. Aphasia, Asthma, Cholera infantum. Cough-colic. Diabetis. Epilepsy, Gout. Impotence. Locomotor ataxy. Nightmare. Paralysis. Paralysis agitans. Psoriasis. Self-
abuse. Sensibility. Sleeplessness. Somnambulism. Stammering. Speech -affections of.Urine-incontinence of.

SPHERES OF ACTION

This remedy acts profoundly on mind, cerebro-spinal nervous system, skin and sexual organs.


PATHOGENESIS

The prolonged administration of the Bromide of Potassium, produces a peculiar state of the system and is known as Bromism. Kali Brom. affects the mind and nerves producing failure of mental power, general numbness, and anaesthesia of mucous membrane esp. of eyes, throat and skin, weakens the heart and lowers temperature.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up : Kali Brom. is more particu-larly adapted to persons inclined to obesity ; to children ; to nervous women.

Termperament: Patient is depressed, melancholic and weepy. Relation with heat and cold: There is no stamping heat-cold relation. Patient is heither hot nor chilly.

Miasm : Psora & Syphilis are in the background.


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Loss of memory : forgets how to talk; absentminded ; has to be told the word before the can speak it (Anac.).

2) Loss of sensibility of the fauces, larynx, urethra, entire body.

3) Fidgety hand ; hands and fingers in constant motion.

4) Nervous, restless, cannot sit still, must move about on keeping occupied.

5) Staggering, uncertain gait ; feels as if the legs were all over side-walk.

6) Profound melacholy (Aur).

7) Incoordination of muscles, (Gels.) nervous weakness or paralysis of motion and numbness.

8) Nervous cough during pregnancy ; hard, dry, almost incessent cough ; threatening abortion. (Con.)

9) Restlessness and sleeplessness due to worry and grief, loss of property or reputation; from business embarrass-ment. (Hyos.)

10) Daily colic in infants at about 5 am (at 4 pm—Colocy., Lyco).

11) Stammering : slow, difficult speech (Bov. Spigel., Stramo.)

12) Epilepsy, usually a day or two before menses (Bufo.) ; at new moon -, headache follows attack.

13) Skin : Acne simplex, indurata, rosacea ; bluish-red pus-tular on face, chest, shoulders.

14) Mind : “Mentally the Kali Brom. Patient is depressed, low-spirited, melancholic, anxious, feels as if they would lose their minds”. There is fits on uncontrollable weeping with profound melancholic delusions and feeling of moral deficiency. Brain Fag. He is nervous, restless, cannot sit still, must move about or keep occupied. Loss of memory, forgets how to talk, has to be told the word before he can speak it.Fear of being poisoned. Night terrors of children, with grinding of teeth in sleep. Child screams, moans and cries. Somnambulism. It is a very good medicine for restlessness and sleeplessness due to worry & grief, loss of property or reputation, from busi-ness embarrassments. Horrid illusions. Acute delirium.

15) Ailments from : Anger. Fright. Emotional disturbances. Worries. Business losses & embarrassments. Sexual excesses. Sexual abuses.

PARTICULARS

Head :  Brain fag. There is heaviness, numbness feeling in head, violent headache particularly in occiput with flushed face, throbbing of carotids and temporals, and feeling of fullness of head.

Gastrointestinal Symptoms :

Throat: Anaesthesia of fauces, pharynx and Larynx. Dys-phagia, esp. of liquids (Ign. Hyos.) Uvula and fauces congested. Stomach : Vomiting with intense thirst, after each meal Persistent hiccough.

Abdomen : Internal coldness of abdomen. Retraction of abdomen.


Colic : Daily colic in infants at about 5 am.

Cholera infantum : With reflex irritation of brain resembling hydrocephalus before effusion ; first stage of hydrocephaloid.

Diarrhoea : Green, watery stool with intense thirst, vomiting and sunken eyes. Diarrhoea with much blood.

Sexual Symptoms :

Male : Sexual debility and impotency after sexual excess. Excessive sexual desire with constant erections at night.

Female : Nymphomania, exaggerated sexual desire. Neuralgia and cystic tumours of ovaries.

Nervous Symptoms : It is one of the important nervous remedies of our materia medica and useful in spasms, epilepsy, night terror of children, sommambulism, paralysis, etc. There is staggering uncertain gait, feels as if legs were all over sidewalk. Incoordination of muscles, nervous weakness or paralysis of motion and numbness is very characteristic symptom of Kali Brom. It is a medicine for spasm during parturition, dentition, whooping cough & from fright, anger or emotional causes, it is suited to congenital, syphilitic, tubercular epilepsy. Epilepsy usually a day or two before menses ; at new moon.

Skin : It is a splendid remedy for various forms of acne. Acne simplex, indurata, rosacea ; bluish— red, papular ; on face, chest, shoulders, displeasing to the eye. Acne leaves unsightly scars. Acne in young fleshy persons of gross habits. Psoriasis.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : from mental exertions, emotions, sexual excess.

Amelioration : when occupied.

Relationships :

It antidotes : Lead poisoning. It follows well: Eugenia Jambos. in acne.


CHAPTER:121

KALI CARBONICUM
Potassium Carbonate HAHNEMAN K,CO,

INTRODUCTION

Postassium carbonate, from which this treasure has been prepared, is a drug about which Farrington says, Kali carb. is indicated in a great variety of diseases, but is a drug much neglected in everyday practice, perhaps because, except in a few of its uses, as in Asthma andPneumonia, it does not appeal strongly enough tothe imagination and, therefore, is not—so to speak “on the spot,” Kent says about the Kali carb. patient, “The Kali carb. patient is a hard one to study and the remedy itself is a hard one to study.” It is a right sided medicine.

CLINICAL

Aneamia, Asthma, Backache, Biliousness, Catarrh, Cough, Cold, Consumption, Ear and Eye affections, Gastralgia, Haemorrhage, Headache, Haemorrhoids, Hysteria, Kidney affection, Liver affection, Menstrual discrders, Preganancy disorders, Stomach and abdominal disorders, Sciatica, Throat and lung affections, Urinary troubles, Uterine affection, Vertigo, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Kali carb. acts specifically on the respiratory mucus membrane, digestive tract, and upon the ovaro-uterine system, heart, liver, kidney, etc.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces a condition of excessive irritation giving rise to a state bordering on inflammation, yet hardly reaching that point. The serous and mucous membrane become extremely dry, as a result of which there is SHARP STITCHING PAIN, enfeebles the heart, lowers the temperature, causes anaemia, promotes tissue waste, increases the amount of urine and its solid constituents especially uric acid and urea.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: The patient is dark skinned and haired, but of lax fibres with inclination to obesity. Especially helpful in diseases of old people who are fleshy with dropsical condition. Puffiness of upper eyelids and paretic tendencies. Relation with heat and cold: The patient is always chilly.




Kali Carbonicum 

Miasm: It is a great anti-psoric remedy.

Diathesis: Tubercular diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. The patient is very much OVERSENSITIVE TO TOUCH; starts when touched ever so lightly, especially on THE feet.

2. Pains are stitching, darting, Worse during rest and lying on affected side (rev.Bryonia).

Bag-like swelling between the upper eye-lids and eyebrows. Early morning aggravation. is very characteristic particularly between 2 to 4 a.m.
(Asthma and cough).Backache accompanies all the complaints. It is of a constant nature; with a sensation as if the back and legs would give out any time. Great debility, So much so that she drops herself into a chair or throws herself on the bed completely exhausted.Sitting up, leaning forward or rocking constantly, relieves the chest affections,especially asthma. Lastly, to conclude, quoted below is what Farrington states. “Sweat, backache and weakness as a combination are not found under any other remedy.

Mind : There is great aversion to being alone (Bismuth, Arsenic, Lycopodium.

Stramonium—desires to be alone, Gels. Ignatia, Nat.mur., Nux vomica, Sepia). Alternating mood with irritability. Obstinate. Hypersensitive to pain. Anxiety arising from chest. Despondent and afraid of imaginary things.

Ailments from : Exposure to cold, over-strain, sexual excess, icecream and iced- water.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache from exposure to cold, riding in cold wind and sexual excess.

Location: Usually in both the temples and occipital region.

Sensation: Sensation of loose feeling in the head.

Character of headache: Stitching pain in temples and-oeciput, congested and heavy. Attack on one side at a time.

Modalities: Aggravation by riding in a carriage, sexual excess and lying on painful side.

Relieved by warm application and by moving.

Concomitants: Yawning during headache; nausea; great dryness of hair; hair falls out.

Eye:

There is stitching pain in the eyes; lids stick together in the morning. BAG-LIKE SWEELING OF UPPER EYELIDS. Swelling of glabella. Weak sight from excessive sexual indulgence.


Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Mouth : Bad, Slimy and bitter taste in the mouth and much saliva. Gums separate from the teeth. Blood and pus ooze out from gums; pyorrhoea, aphtae; tongue coated white. There is toothache only when eating with throbbing. Toothache is worse when touched by anything cold or warm.

Stomach :

Causation : Gastric disorders from ice cream or ice-water.Dyspepsia of old people with burning, acidity or bloating and gagging; feeling of a lump in the pit of stomach. There is sour eructation with nausea, ending jn sour vomiting. Vomiting is better by lying down.Constant feeling as if the stomach were full of water. Anxiety felt in stomach. Throbbing and cutting pain in the stomach with disgust for food. There is a feeling of anxiety from the stomach. Epigastrium is extremely SENSITIVE TO TOUCH EXTERNALLY,Stitching pain in the liver region. Excessive flatulence. Everything eaten or DRUNK APPEARS TO BE CONVERTED into gas (lodum). Abdomen is distended and sensitive; feels as if it would burst. Chronic liver troubles with soreness, jaundice and dropsy. There is pain from left hypochondrium to abdomen.
The patient must turn on right side before he can rise.

Stool : Stool is insufficient and soft. Stool mixed with blood. Ineffectual urging to stool. Rectum feels too weak to expel it. Constipation during menstruation. Stool is like sheep’s dung. Expelled with much exertion. In the anus there is burning, stitching, cutting and soreness. Burning and gripping in rectum.

Haemorrhoids : With stitching and burning pain; piles protrude during stool wih much bleeding. Piles are large, swollen, painful and very sensitive. Itching with ulceration around the anal orifice. There may also be pain in haemorrhoid when coughing.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Whatever may be the disease whether pneumonia, bronchitis, phthisis, laryngitis, etc., it matters little. Kali carb. may be thought of if the following symptoms are present.There is shortness of breath at night with complete hoarseness of voice. Raw pain in larynx on coughing. Cough is worse between 2 to 4a.m. Paroxysmal cough from tickling in throat, spasmodic with gagging and vomiting; suffocative with dryness in larynx; acute pain in chest while coughing.Expectoration of small round lumps from throat. STITCHING AND CUTTING PAIN IN THE CHEST or inspiration, which is worse on lying down and during rest. Sore pain in chest from talking, breathing.
lifting, and pressure.

Modalities: Aggravation at night, 2-4 a.m. from cold, lying on painful side and during rest.

Amelioration by warm weather, moving and rocking.

Asthma : Dyspnoea, palpitation and suffocative respiration.

Relieved by sitting up and leaning forward and by rocking. Aggravation from cold, between 2 to 4a.m.

Menses : First menses difficult and delayed in young girls. Thereafter, the character of menses may be.

Time: Early or too late.

Quantity: Profuse or scanty.

Duration: Short lasting.
Character of blood: Pale red.


Kali Carbonicum 


Concomitants: With, soreness about genitals; pain from back passes down to gluteal muscles. CONSTANT BACKACHE with cutting pain in abdomen.
Uterine haemorrhage :

Blood constantly oozing out after copious flow with violent backache.

Relieved by, sitting and pressure.

Back :

There is SEVERE BACKACHE during pregnancy; after miscarriage. Small of back fells weak. Lumbago with sudden sharp pain extending up and down the back and travelling to thighs.
General Modalities :

Aggravation: After-coition, at rest, generally worse in morning, in cold weather, from soup and coffees, 2.to0 4. a.m. lying on left and painful side.

Amelioration: Warm weather, by rocking, during day when moving about.

Relations :
Complementary to: Carbo veg., phos., Sep., Nit. ac., Nat. mur.It follows: Nux vom. well in stomach and bladder troubles. Antidoted by: Camph., Coffea.

CHAPTER :122

KALI MURIATICUM

Potassium Chloride KCl

INTRODUCTION

This is one of the organic tissue salts introduced by Schussler. This remedy has been proved by Central Council For Research in Homoeopathy, Govt. of India, but the symptomatology has not yet been included in any Materia Medica. Kali Mur. unites with albumen,forming fibrin, which is found in every tissue of the body except the bones. In other words this Salt is found in blood corpuscles muscles, nerve and brain cells as well as in the intercellular fluids. In its physiological character it is closely
related to sodium chloride, many of the properties of which it shares.

CLINICAL

Apthae, Bubo. Chilblains. Constipation. Cystitis, Dropsy. Dysentery. Ear-affections of. Eczema. Eyes affection of, Haemorrhoids. Hodgkin’s disease, Jaundice. Cracking of Joints. Leucorrhoea. Mumps. Rheumatism. Bad effects of vaccination, Warts. Diphtheria, Croup. Eustachian catarrh.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Kali Mur. acts on blood corpuscles, muscles, nerve & brain cells.

PATHOGENESIS

Kali Mur acts well in the second stage of inflammations of mucous membrane & serous membranes when the exudation is of a fibrinous character usually white in colour. It is also of great use in catarrhal affection & glandular swellings.

PARTICULARS

Eyes : Discharge of white mucus from the eyes, or yellow, greenish matter and yellow purulent scabs. Superficial flat ulcer of the eye. Trachoma. Corneal opacities.

Ears : Chronic catarrhal conditions of the middle ear. Snapping and noises in the ear- Beafness from swelling of external ear, throat troubles. Great effusion about the auricle. Glands about the ear swollen. Threatended mastoid.

Nose : Catarrh. Phlegm white thick ; Vault of pharynx covered with adherent crusts. Nosebleed. Stuffy cold.

Mouth : Aphthae thrush, white ulcers in mouth. Swollen glands about jaw & neck. Coating of tongue grayish white, dry or slimy.




Kali Muriaticum 



Throat : Tonsils inflamed, enlarged so much can hardly breathe. Second remedy in tonsillitis as soon as swelling appears. Follicular tonsillitis. Adherent crusts in vault of pharynx. Hospital sore throat.

Stomach : Fatty or rich food causes indigestion. Dyspepsia & indigestion with white gray tongue. Sick feeling after taking fat, pain & heavy feeling on the right side under the shoulder. Indigestion with vomiting of white opaque mucus, water gathers in mouth. Pain in stomach with constipation.

Abdomen & Stool :

Abdominal tenderness and swelling. Flatulence. Thread worms causing itching at the anus.

Constipation — With light coloured stools denoting want of bile, sluggish action of liver or ocurring in consequence of some primary disturbance especially where fat and pastry disagree.

Diarrhoea — After fatty food and in typhoid fever with pale yellow, white or slimy stools.

Dysentery — purging with slimy stools Haemorrhoids — bleeding piles, blood dark and thick,
fibrinous, clotted.

Female Genital Organs :

Menstruation too late or suppressed, checked or too early ; excessive discharge; blood is dark clotted or tough black like tar. Leucorrhoea ; discharge of milky white mucus thick non-irritating bland. Morning sickness, with vomiting of white phlegm.

Breast—Bunches in breast feel quite, soft and are tender.

Respiratory Organs :

Asthma with gastric derangements, mucus white and hard to cough up. Rattling sounds of air passing through thick tenacious mucus in the bronchi, difficult to cough up. Hard cough. Pnemonia. Pleurisy.Phthisis with thick white milky sputa.

Back & Extremities :

Rheumatic pains felt only during motion ; or increased by it. Nightly rheumatic pains ; worse from warmth of bed. Lightning like pains from small of back to feet ; must get out of bed and sit up. Rheumatic fever ; exudations and swelling around the joints. Hands get stiff while writing. Chronic rheumatism and swelling when all movements cause pain.

Skin : Abscess, boils, carbuncles etc in the second stage, when interstitial exudation takes place and to cause swelling to disappear before matter forms. Ache., erythema, eczema and other eruptions on the skin with vesicles containing thick white contents. Dry flour like scales on the skin. Ulcers with whitish, flour like coating, or fibrinous white discharge. Bunions, chilblains, eruptions connected with stomach or menstrual derangement.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : Rich food, fats, motion.



CHAPTER:123 KALI PHOSPHORICUM


Phosphate of Potassium DR. H.C. ALLIEN KHPO,

INTRODUCTION

This is one of the organic tissue salts introduced by Dr. Schussler. This medicine has been proved by several authorities from time to time but proving by provers’ union of Chicago  under the direction of H. C. Allen is notable one.One of the greatest nerve remedies.

CLINICAL

Anaemia, Asthma, Brainfag, Cancrum Oris, Carbuncle, Chilblains, Dysentery, Enuresis, Gangrene, Hypo-chondriasis. Hysteria, Insomnia,Melancholia, Neurasthenia, Paralysis, Puerperal mania, Whitlow.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main action of this drug is on animal fluids & tissues, notably of the brain, nerves, muscles and blood-cells.

PATHOGENESIS

Kaliphos acts upon the brain & nerve cells upon the corpuscles of the blood affecting the nutrition, causing irritation followed by inflammation & lastly moderate degree of degeneration.

CONSTITUTION

Physical Make Up—Anaemic Chlorotic & delicate persons, worn out from long suffering.

Temperament—Nervous temperament Relation with head & cold—Chilly patient

Miasm—Psora.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Conditions arising from want of nerve power, neurasthenia, mental and physical depression are wonderfully improved by this remedy.

2) It corresponds to states of adynamia and decay, gangrenous conditions.

3) Great prostration runs through the remedy.

4) Discharges are very offensive, putrid.

5) Headache of students and those worn out by fatigue.

6) Right sided neuralgia relieved by cold applications.

7) Tongue coated brownish, like mustard. Excessively dry in the morning.

8) A nervous ‘gone’ sensation at the pit of the stomach.

9) Diarrhoea : Foul, putrid odor, caused by fright with depression and exhaustion.

10) Menses : too late or too scanty in pale irritable sensitive, lachrymose females.

11) Sleep—Sleeplessness after worry or excitement from nervous causes. Somnambulism, walking in sleep in children.

12) Ailments from : Grief. Sexual excitement indulged or suppressed. Mechanical injuries. Blows.

18) Mind : Very nervous, depression of spirit, general irrita-bility. Great desponendency about business. Loss of memory. Indisposition to meet people. Shyness, disinclined to converse. Want of energy. Slightest labour seems a heavy task. Brainfag from overwork. Anxiety, nervous dread lethargy. Gloomy moods, fancies, looks on the darkside of everything, dark forebodings. Hysteria, night terrors, somanambulism. Extreme lassitude and dperession. Hallucinations and illusions of senses.

PARTICULARS

Head :
Vertigo from lying, on standing up, from sitting andwhen looking upward.

Causation: Headache of students and those worn out by fatigue.

Location: Occipital headache.

Sensation: Head feels tired & dull. Back of head sore as if hair was pulled. 

Modalities: Headaches are relieved by gentle motion.

Concomitant: Headache with weary, empty gone feeling at stomach.

Eyes :

Weakness of sight, loss of perceptive power after diphtheria, from exhaustion. Sensation of sand or sticks in eyes. Drooping of eyelids.

Ears: Deafness from want of nervous perception with weakness and exhaustion of the nerves. Discharges of foul, offensive ichorous pus from the ears. Humming and buzzing in the ears.

Gastrointestinal symptoms :

Mouth : Stomatitis, breath offensive, fetid. Gums spongy and receding. Toothache with easily bleeding gums. Tongue coated brownish, like mustard. Excessively dry in the morning. Speech slow & inarticulate. Grinding of teeth.



Throat : Throat very dry ; desires to swallow all the time. Hoarseness and loss of voice. Gangrenous sore Throat. Paralysis of vocal cords.

Stomach : A nervous “gone” sensation at the pit of stomach, Feels seaside without nausea. Vomiting of sour, bitter food and of blood. Empty, gnawing sensation relieved by eating. Indigestion with nervous depression.

Rectum : Diarrhoea caused by fright with depression & exhaustion. Stool Foul, putrid. Diarrhoea while eating, Prolapsus recti. Dysentery ; Stool consists of pure blood; patient becomes delirious. Rectum burns & feels sore.

Urinary Organs :

Very yellow urine. Incontinence of urine from nervous debility. Enuresis. Paretic conditions of bladder. Bleeding from the urethra.

Respiratory Symptoms :
Hay asthara. Asthma from the least food, short breath on going upstairs. Cough from irritation in the trachea which feels sore. Expectoration thick, yellow, salty, foetid. Chest very sore.

Male: Nocturnal emissions ; sexual power diminished. Impotence and painful emissions at night without erection. Utter prostration and weak vision after coitus.

Female : Menses too late or too scanty in pale, irritable, senstitive lachrymose females. Irreguiar scanty almost black! offensive odor. Amenorrhoea with depression of spirits, lassitude and nervous debility; Leucorrhoea yellowish scalding acrid.

Back and Extremities : Paralytic or rheumatic lameness with stiffness after rest yet becoming beter by gentle motion. Exertion or fatigue aggravates. Idiopathic softening of spinal cord. Patient has treutie in guiding himself, loss of power of movement.

General Modulities

Aggravation: excitement, worry, mental and physical exertion ; eating cold, early morning.

Amelioration: warmth, rest, nourishment.

CHAPTER:124 KALI SULPHURICUM

Potassium Sulphate a

INTRODUCTION
One of the twelve tissue remedies introduced by Dr. Schussler. This drug is yet to be proved homeopathically. Symptoms available are from Schussler’s work as well as clinical sources. This drug is known as “Schussler’s Pulsatilla”.

CLINICAL

Asthma. Catarrh. Dandruff. Eczema. Epithelioma. Itch. Polypus. Psoriasis. Rheumatism, whooping cough. Ch. Eustachian Catarrh.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its chief action is on epidermis, epithelium, muscles, nerves & blood corpuscles,

PATHOGENESIS

The Oxygen taken up by the iron content in the blood corpuscles is carried to every cell of the organism by Kali Sulph, so the deficiency of Kali Sulph produces vertigo, chilliness, palpitation, fear, melancholy, desquamation of epidermis & yellow mucus discharge.

PERTICULARS
Head :

Rheumatic headache beginning in evening. Bald spots. Dandruff and scaldhead. Worse in warm room and better in cool or open air.

Ears :

Eustachian deafness. Discharge of yellow matter. Pain under the ear, sharp cutting pain, tension. Stitches and piercing below the mastoid process.

Nose:

Colds with yellow, slimy expectoration. Nose obstructed. Smell lost. Engorgement of the.nasal pharyngeal mucous membrane, mouth-breathing, snoring ete. remaining after adenoids.



Stomach :

Tongue coated yellow and slimy. Insipid, pappy taste. Gums painful. Burning thirst nausea and vomiting. Indigestion with sensation of pressure as of a load & fullness at the pi, of the stomach. Dread of hot drinks.

Abdomen :

Colicky pains ; abdomen feels cold to touch; tym- panitic, tense. Yellow, slimy diarrhoea. Constipation with haemorrhoids.

Male: Gonorrhoea ; discharge slimy, yellowish green. orchitis. Gleet.

Female : Menses too late, scanty with feeling of weight in abdomen. Metrorrhagia.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Croupy hoarseness. Coarse rales. Rattling of mucus in chest. Bronchial asthma with yellow expectoration. Cough worse in evening and in hot atmosphere. Whooping cough with yellow slimy expectoration.

Extremities : Rheumatic pains in the back, nape of neck or in the limbs, periodical worse in the evening or in a warm room and better in cool atmosphere. Pains are shifting, wandering.

Skin: Eczema; burning, itching, papular eruption. Néettlerash, Psoriasis. Polypi. Epithelioma. Seborrhoea. Ringworm of scalp or beard with abundant scales. Sores on the skin with yellow watery secretion.

General Modalities:

Aggravation: Evening, heated room.

Ameliaoration: Cool open air.

Comparison between Kali Sulph & Pulsatilla Similarities

1) Aggravation of symptoms in a warm room and evening

2) Amelioration in the cool open air.

3) Discharges from mucous membranes are yellow, purulent in character. Sometimes yellowish green coating of tongue yellow and slimy.

4) Pressure & feeling of fullness in stomach

5) Pains in limbs worse at night and from warmth better in cool open air.

6) Migratory or shifting and wandering rheumatic pains.


Disimilarities Kali Sulph Pulsatilla

1) Mentals of Kali Sulph ‘None of importance” —_

1) Mild, gentle, yeilding weeps easily. Easily move to laughter or tears.

2) Burning thirst 

2) Thirstlessness

3) Not much 3) Changeability of symptoms

4) Skin and nails and especially affected 

4) Chillblains that turn blue suggest



CHAPTER : 125 KALMIA LATIFOLIA

Mountain Laurel Ericaceae

INTRODUCTION

It is one of the important remedies for rheumatism and especially adapted to people of rheumatic and gouty diathesis with tendency to
metastasis. Dr. Hering and his friends proved this remedy for the first time and introduced it into homoeopathic practice.

CLINICAL

Angina Pectoris, Gout. Heart—disease of, Reratitis, Neuralgia. Rheumatism. Vertigo.

SPHERES OF ACTION AND PATHOGENESIS

Kalmia has prominent action on heart, blood circulation, nerves, joints and skin.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Kalmia is adapted to rheumatic and gouty complaints esp. when heat is involved as a sequel of rheumatism or gout.

2) Pain : (a) sticking, darting, pressing, shooting in a downward direction.

          (b) Pain attended or succeeded by numbness of affected part.

3) Heart complaints developed from or alternate with rheumatism.


4) Rhuematism : Joints hot, red, swollen and painful ; shifting pain going from one joint to another suddenly.

5) Pulse slow, scarcely perceptible (35 to 40 per minute) pale face and cold extremitis.

6) Severe stitching pain in right eye and orbit ; pain worse when turning the eyes.

7) Vertigo when stooping or looking down (Spig.)

8) Ailments from : Chill, Exposure, wind, sun.

PARTICULARS

Eyes :

It is particularly useful in neuralgic and rheumatic pain in the eyes and eye balls. There is stiff drawing sensation when moving the eyes. Severe stitching pain in right eye and orbit with stiffness in muscle, Rheumatic iritis, scleritis with impairment of vision.


Neuralgia :

It is a great remedy for prosopalgia esp. when right side is affected. Pain starts after exposure to cold and extends over the head, ear, face and then goes down to the arm. Pain attended with or succeeded by numbness in affected parts.

Modalities :

Aggravation : Right side, becoming cold, Sunrise to sunset. Amelioration : By eating.

Rheumatism :
(a) Causation : Chill, Exposure.

(b) Location : Specially right side.

(©) Sensation .-There is sensation of numbness, coldness, weakness in limbs.

Character of pain : Pains are sticking, darting, pressing, shooting in a downward direction. Pains are attended or succeeded by numbness of affected part. There is severe pain in joints which changes place suddenly and goes from one joint to another. Joints are hot, red, painful & swollen.

Modalities :

Aggravation : From least movement, becoming cold. 

Amelioration : Continued motion.

Concomitant: Heart complaint alternates with rheumatism.

Heart: This remedy is suited to heart troubles that have developed from rheumatism or when heart is involved as a sequel of rheumatism or gout. The heart’s action is tumultous, rapid and feeble. There is a very sharp pain in the heart which takes away the breath with extreme dyspnoea and anguish. Pain shoots down into the abdomen and stomach. Palpitation worse leaning forward. Pulse slow. scarcely perceptible (35 to 40 per minute) ; pale face and cold extremities.

Modalities :

Aggravation : Bending forward, lying on left side.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : Leaning forward, looking downward, motion, open air, with the sun, becoming cold.

Amelioration : Eating, continued motion.

Relation :

Similar to Led. Rhod., Spig., in rheumatic affection & gout.

Complementary: Benzoic Acid.

It follows : Spig. well in heart diseases.





CHAPTER: 126  KREOSOTUM

Kreosote WHALE A product of distillation of wood tar

INTRODUCTION

Kreosotum occupies the second position the TRIO OF OFFENSIVE DRUGS—first being Mercurius and the third, Baptisia. In Kreosote
the characteristic odour is PUTRID. Being a member of the tar family, ACRIDITY is the second characteristic of the drug. PUTRIDITY
AND ACRIDITY run through the whole drug. Kreosote is mainly a left sided medicine.

CLINICAL

Abdominal and stomach troubles, Cough, Cancer, Carbuncle, Consumption, Constipation, Cholera, Dentition, Diarrhoea, Enuresis,
Haemorhage, Haemorrhoids, Hysteria, Leucorrhoea, Menstrual disorders, Neuralgia, Pregnancy troubles, Rheumatism, Teeth Caries, Toothache, Ulcers, Urine—incontinence of, Vomiting, Whooping Cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Kreosote acts upon the lymphatic system and especially upon the mucus membrane of digestive system, female generative organs, the skin and teeth.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces tendency to disorganisation, ulceration and destruction of the parts involved such as teeth, skin, mucus membrane of digestive system, etc. Scorbutic gum comes under the pathogenetip action of this drug.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up: Especially suited to ladies having dark complexion.

Tall, slender, ill developed, overgrown, very tall for her age (Phos.).

Children are old looking, wrinkled, scrofulous with rapid emaciation and difficult dentition.

Temperament: Irritable temperament.

Relation with heat and cold; Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora and syphilis are in the background.

Diathesis: Haemorrhagic and scorbutic diathesis.



GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Haemorrhagic diathesis; small wounds bleed freely.

2. Offensiveness, acridity and putridity of all discharges from mucous membrane are the keynote symptoms of whole remedy.

3. Highly chilly Patient. All the symptoms are aggravated from cold and relieved b’y warmth in general.

4. Pulsation is felt all over the body (Lil. tig.).

5. For flow of blood from uterus and vagina consequent upon lifting, over-exertion or coitus, Kreosote Is infallible.

6. Putrid and acrid leucorrhoea is a striking feature of this remedy.

7. Decayed teeth and gum, with foetid, corrosive discharge calls for this remedy. Tooth begins to decay as soon as it comes out.

8. In cholera infantum with profuse vomiting, cadaverous smelling stool, Kreosote is efficacious.

PARTICULARS

Haemorrhagic diathesis (Crot. nor., Ipecac, Lachesis, Phosphorus, Secale cor., China). Small wounds bleed profusely. Flow is passive in epistaxis, haematemesis, haemoptysis, haematuria and from uterus. Blood oozes out for weeks together.

Character of blood: Dark and very much offensive.

There is haemorrhage after extraction of teeth (Ham., Bovista).

Nose :

In epistaxis, offensive smell and discharges. Blood is acrid, offensive and coming out from the nose.

Mouth :

Painful dentition. Teeth begin to decay as soon as they appear. Gums are bluish red, soft, spongy. dark oozing after extraction of teeth.

Stomach :

Kresote is one of the good drugs of cancer of stomach, there is burning pain in the stomach soon after eating and sense of fulness with increasing nausea ending in vomiting which is sour, acrid, undigested and offensive. After swallowing water, bitter taste is prolonged in the mouth for a long time.

In malignant diseases of stomach, where there is vomiting of blood, sputa is very much offensive and covered with dark blood, if Kreosote is given, it will furnish some degree of palliation even in cancerous and other incurable diseases of the stomach.

Menses :

It is well indicated and suited in MENORRHAGIA OR DYSMENORRHOEA.
Time: Too early.




Quantity: Too profuse.

Character of blood: black, very much offensive and acrid, causes rawness upon the skin and
genitals which are swollen.

Intermittent type of flow: At times almost ceasing and then commencing again.

Modality: Flow only on lying down (Bovista, Ammon. carb., Mag. carb. Rev. of Cactus; Causticum, Sabina and Lil.tig.). CEASES ON SITTING OR WALKING ABOUT. Cold drink relieves

menstrual pain.

Concomitants: Severe headache before and during menses. Roaring and humming in ears with deafness before and during menses.
Leucorrhoea :

Time: Between the periods (Bovista, Borax, Con.).

Quantity: Very much acrid, corrosive, offensive and yellowish, causes rawness and soreness of the parts wherever it touches. Has the odour of green corn; stiffens like starch, stains the linen yellow.

Pregnancy :
During pregnancy there is vomiting of sweetsh water with profuse ptyalism. After pregnancy : There is lochia, which is dark, brown, very much offensive and acrid. Almost ceases, then freshens up again with violent itching of vagina.


Urine :
There is incontinence of urine. Great urging for urination, must hurry when desire comes to urinate. Dreams of urinating. Character of urine : Urine is pale, copious, very much offensive and bloody, causes violent itching
of vulva and vagina.

Modality: Urine passes during first sleep or at first part of the night (Sepia).

Concomitants: Smarting and burning pain during and after micturition.

Baby :

Chilly baby easily affected by cold. Child looks older than he really is.

Psoric and scrofulous baby with rapid emaciation. Dentition is very painful: Teeth begin fo decay as soon as they appear with bluish spongy
gums. Mentally the baby is irritable; wants this and that but is never satisfied, always wanting something new but when offered flatly refuses it (Bry., Staphysagria, Cina, Cham.).In cholera infantum: There is profuse, offensive, acrid stool causing rawness and soreness of parts,
with vomiting of food.Nocturnal enuresis in baby, during the first sleep, from whichihe child is roused with difficulty.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In open air, cold weather, from washing or bathing in cold water.

Amelioration: From warmth in general.


Relations :
It is inimical to: Carbo veg.
Follows well: Arsenic, Phosphorus and Sulphur.
Antidoted by: Acon., Nux vorn.

Followed well by: Sulph., Belt., Ars., Calc. carb., Lyco., Nit. ac., Rhus tox., Sepia.

CHAPTER 127 LAC CANINUM

LAC CANINUM

Dog's Milk SWAN

INTRODUCTION

Lac caninum is an animal product, used as food of early animal life and, therefore, corresponds to the, beginning of our innermost physical nature. In crude and natural state, milk is a complete food, but when it is potentised it is an infallible remedy for many diseases, if symptoms correspond. Persons who dislike milk will become sick from taking it in. potentised form. It is one of the ‘Ladies Remedies’.

CLINICAL

Breast affection, Backache, Female sexual ovans, Headache, Menstrual disorders, Leucorrhoea, Neuralgia, Nose and Throat
affection, Rheumatism, Sciatica, Stomach affection, Uterine troubles, Vaccinosis, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Lac caninum acts especially upon the mucous membrane, female uro-genital system, uterus, cervix, throat and mind.

PATHOGENESIS

In the throat it produces an inflammation, particularly of the left side; of course, it extends to right side, but again settles back to the left. It inflames and congests the ovaries and uterus.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Alteration of sides is a great characteristic of this remedy e.g., in diphtheria, rheumatism, pain and even eczema.

2. Erratic disposition of symptoms such as pain constantly flying from one part to another which is yet another striking feature of Lac can.

3. Hyperaesthesia of skin and all parts is another keynote symptoms of Lac can., e.g. during,diphtheria and tonsillitis throat becomes       exceedingly sensitive to touch (Lach).

4. Chronic blue condition, everything seems dark.

5. SHINING, GLAZED APPEARANCE OF THROAT during diphtheria, chancres in syphilis and ulcers having glistening look reminds of this remedy.

6. Breasts and throat get sore at menstrual period. They cannot bear jar; must hold them firmly when stepping up or going downstaris.

7. The patient is very hungry; cannot eat enough, as hungry after eating as before. Faintness in the stomach, with sinking feeling in    epigastrium. EI Discharge of flatus from vagina (Lyco., Nux mos., Sang.).

9. While walking seems to be walking in the air, when lying does not seem to touch the bed.

10. Mind : Very forgetful, absent-minded; makes purchases and walks, away without them ; forgets her own name. In writing makes mistakes; uses 
too many words, but not the right one, omits the final letter. Cannot concentrate the mind to read or study. Fears to be alone (Kali carb.), of 
dying, of becoming insane. The patient is Very much nervous, fears of falling downstairs. Despondent, hopeless, thinks her disease is incurable; 
has not a friend living; nothing worth living for her; could weep at any moment. Attack of rage with cursing and swearing at slightest 
provocation (Lilium tig. Nitric acid, Anac.). Another strange state is that when walking she seems to be on air and when lying

seems as if she is not on the bed and touching the floor. Visions of snakes. (Lach).

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Location: Mostly frontal headache, but it has also hot occipital headache; above the eyes, especially of the left side.

Sensation: Sensation as if the brain were alternately contracted and relaxed.

Character of pain: Shifting pain, constantly flying from one part to another; changing from side to side; every few hours or days; pain during the day, first on left side and then on other side.

Modalities:
“e Aggravation: From turning the eyeball upwards and using the eyes for fine work, touch or noise.

* Amelioration: By going into open air.

Nose :

Coryza with discharge of thick, white mucus. One nostril stuffed up and the other frnd discharging.

The condition alternates one after another. The character of discharge is bloody, pus like, very much acrid and causes rawness of lip and nose.

Throat :

Location: In diphtheria or tonsillitis, symptoms shift from one side to the other and again go to the original side, and this condition alternates.

Sensation: Of lump in throat with constant desire to swallow.

Look of the throat: Shining, glazed appearance of the diphtheritic deposits with yellow and white patches.

Character of pain: Throat is very much sensitive to touch both internally and externally. Very much painful, shifting pain constantly flying from one part to another, changing from side to side every few hours or days. Pain extends to ear or shoots to ear.


Modalities:
 Aggravation: By empty swallowing and from touch.
 Amelioration: By cold and cold drinks.

In throat troubles, it differs from Lachesis where left side of the throat is affected. Both are very much sensitive to touch. But in Lachesis, there is DARK BLACK, BLUISH, PURPLE COLOUR of the membrane whereas in Lac can., there is SHINING. GLAZED APPEARANCE OF diphtheritic membrane.
In Lac can., the pain shoots to the ear. This is not found in Lachesis. Aggravation after sleep of Lachesis is not present in Lac can.

Stomach :

Sinking feeling in epigastrium. Very hungry; cannot eat enough to satisfy. As hungry after eating as before.

Rheumatism :

Location: Rheumatic pains in extremities and back especially of left side.

Sensation: Pain in the limbs as if beaten with rheumatic swelling of joints.

Character of pain: Shifting pain from one joint to another, flying from one part to another, changing from side to side.

Modalities: Aggravation from motion and heat and amelioration from cold.

Menses :

Time: Too early.

Quantity: Too profuse.

Character of blood: Flow in gushes of bright red, viscid and stringy blood (Dark, black stringy, Crocus sat.).

Pain: During menses there is severe pain in the abdomen in the left, which fly from side to side.

Modalitiy: Relieved by appearence of flow (Lach., Zincum).

Concomitants: Sore throat beigns and ends with menstruation. Breast painful, sensitive and swollen before and during menses.

Breast :

Inflamed breast.

Sensation: Feels as if they would suppurate. Breast painful and swollen before and during menses. There Is loss of milk while nursing without any
known cause. Serviceable in almost all cases when it it required to dry up milk.

Modalities: Aggravation from the least jar and towards evening and relief from holding firmly
when going up or downstairs.

Sexual organs : Are very sensitive to touch; easily excited from touch, pressure, on sitting or friction by walking
(Murex. Platina). Physometra (air passes from vagina), (Lyc. Sang. Nux mos.).

Backache :

Location: Backache of supra-renal region extending downwards.

Pain: Intense, unbearable pain, shifts rapidly from side to side. Spine aches from base to brain to coccyx. Very much‘ensitive to touch       and pressure.


Modalities: Aggravation from rest and on first motion.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In the.morning on one day and in the evening of the next day.

Amelioration: Cold and cold drinks, rest and lying down.

Relations :

Similar to: Apis, Lachesis, Murex.



CHAPTER: 128 LAC, DEFLORATUM


Skimmed Milk DR. SWAN

INTRODUCTION

This remedy owes its origin to Dr. Swan who in his turn got the idea of potentising skimmed milk upon reading “Donkin’s Skimmed Milk Treatment of Diab-etes and Bright’s Disease”.

CLINICAL

Constipation. Dropsy. Diabetes. Headache. Vomiting. Globus hystericus. Menses suppressed. Obesity. Lactation defective.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up—pale, sickly, anaemic look, wornout, wasted persons with sallow complexion. Relation with heat & cold: Chilly patient. The patient is chilly all the time even in warm room, near fire. Miasm : Psora and syphilis in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Great prostration is felt whether she does anything or not, great fatigue when walking.

2) It is one of the top most medicines for sick headache.

3) Constipation : Stool large, hard, painful, extorting cries.

4) Aversion to milk.

5) “Milk sickness”—It is most useful and frequently needed remedy for those who cannot take milk, who suffer from various complaints    like  disordered stomach, headache etc.

6) It is used in cases of defecient milk secretion in young mothers, (to dry up milk- Asaf., Lac Can.)

7) Menses : Delayed or suppressed by putting hands in cold water, drinking a glass of milk will promptly suppress flow until next period.

8) Great restlessness, extreme and protracted suffering from loss of sleep (Coc., Nit. Ac.)

9) Globus hystericus : Sensation of a large ball rising from stomach to throat, causing sense of suffocation (Asaf., Kal.)

10) Sensation : as if cold air was blowing on her, even while covered up, as if sheets were damp.

11) Nausea and vomiting : With no relation to eating. First there is vomiting of undigested food, instensely acid, then of bitter water, of     pregnancy.

12) Causations : Injuries, milk, loss of sleep, defective nutri-tion, putting hands in cold water, suppressed malaria.
 
13) Mind : Mentally the patient is despondent, he does not care to live and has no fear of death, but is sure he is going to die.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation : Milk, loss of sleep.

Location : Begins in forehead extending to occiput (Bry., Nux V., Sepia, Tuber.).

Sensation : As if head would burst. There is also a sensation as if top of head was lifted off and brain was coming out.

Character of pain : The pain is most excruciating and unbearable. Intense throbbing pain in forehead.

Modalities : Aggravation—In morning on rising, noise, light, motion, during menses, conversation. periodically (every 8 days).

Amelioration : Pressure, tight bandaging, profuse urination, cold application.

Concomitant : Headache in anaemic, chilly patients who have tendency to constipation. Headache associated with intense photophobia, great               postration, nausea and vomiting and blindness. Headache alternating with tonsillitis (Clarke).

Constipation : It is needed in inveterate, intensely chronic cases where the most powerful purgative fails. It is usually associated with periodical headache and vomiting. The feaeces are dry hard and large and they lacerate anus extorting cries with ineffectual urging. Dropsy : It has been used in dropsy from organic heart disease or weak heart, from chronic liver complaint, far advanced albuminuria also from suppressed malaria.

Relations :

Compare : Nat. Mur.



CHAPTER:129  LACHESIS


Surukuku Snake Poison HERING Ophidia


INTRODUCTION

Of all the remedies derived from snake poison, Lachesis predominantly leads and serves as the most, valuable one. The curative power of
this virulent venom of Surukuku Snake of South America, was quite unknown untill Dr. Constantine Hering had potentised and proved it first on himself, to be of immense benefits for millions. The idea GREATER THE POISON, GREATER THE REMEDY eventually struck him, resulting in his greatest contribution to generations of patients suffering from many desperate diseases, especially at, during and after climacteric age for those who have been changed both mentally and physically and are thin and emaciated rather than fleshy.

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Apoplexy, Asthma, Boils, Carbuncles, Change of life, Cough, Diphtheria, Epilepsy, Enteric fever, Flatulence, Gangrene, Haemorrhage, Haemorrhoids, Heart affection, Headache, Jaundice, Laryngitis, Liver affection, Mental disorders, Malignant pustules, Neuralgia, Pneumonia, Puerperal fever and convulsion, Purpura, Pyaemia, Quinsy, Skin affections, Throat and lung affections, Ulcers, Varicose veins, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Being a constitutional DEEP AND LONG ACTING POLYCHREST REMEDY, Lachesis has great affinity for almost any and every organ in the body. However, its action are more manifest on the nervous system, mind, cardio-vascular system, skin and mucous membrane, respiratory organs,heart,kidney.female genital organs, etc.

PATHOGENESIS

Like any other poison, Lachesis disorganises and decomposes the blood, making it More fluid and non-coaguable, resulting in haemorrhage, asthenic and malignant inflammation, ecchymosis, gangrene, abscess, pyaemia, general typhoid condition and jaundice, It irritates peripheral nerve, setting in hypersensitiveness, While its action on Pneumogastric nerve causes irritation of throat, larynx, bronchus and heart, it poisons
the nerve centres, producing profound prostration, convulsion and unconsciousness implicating the functional integrity of brain.




MAIERI

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: It is ideally suited to thin and emaciated subjects DURING AND AFTER CLIMACTERIC AGE, who have been changed both mentally and physically by their illness; to persons having disposition to low spirit and indolence with BLUE AND PURPLE LOOK.

Temperament: Melancholic and sad.

Relation with heat and cold: Lachesis patients cannot bear heat. They are HOT PATIENTS and are easily affected by heat in general, under all circumstances and in all cases.

Miasm: In Lachesis we find one of the greatest anti-psoric remedies. Psora is in the background for all troubles.

Diathesis: Haemorrhagic diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Lachesis is predominantly A LEFT SIDED REMEDY. All complaints commence on the left side and go to right excepting the lower limbs.

2. All symptoms are worse during and after sleep. Lachesis “sleeps into aggravation and aggravation from sleep”. Because of increased sufferings    such as suffocation, pain, etc, the patient is terribly afraid to go to sleep in spite of the fact
   that sleep is really needed.

3. Great sensitivenesss to touch, all over, especially throat, abdomen, etc. Even cannot bear clothes to touch which cause uneasiness and produce    nervousness. There is great intolerence of tight clothings. Wants everything loose (Apis).

4. Most of the complaints ARE RELIEVED BY MENSTRUAL FLOW (Zinc).

5. Climactric ailments, “Have never been well since that time” says Lachesis patient referring to menopausal period.

6. Burning all over the body: HOT FLUSHES AND HOT PERSPIRATION, hot haemorrhages; burning on vertex, etc.

7. Blueness and purple colour in every trouble amply singles out Lachesis—blue and purple face inflamed spot is purple, skin is blue, ulcers are    blue, etc.,

8. A sense of constriction and tight feeling everywhere-—heart, throat, etc.

9. Sensation of a ball in the inside or organs, especially urinary bladder.

10. Great desire for fanning, but slowly and from a distance (Med.—rapidly and from near, Carbo. veg).

11. Great physical and mental exhaustion, trembling in whole body.

12. Trembling tongue: Difficult to protrude. Trembles like that of a snake. Tongue is black.

13. Desire for wine, liquors, coffee. Aversion to food, acids and drinks.


Haemorrhagic diathesis : Small wounds bleed easily and profusely (Crot. hor.,

Kreosote, Ham., China, Secale cor., Phos); bleeding with malignant and asthenic inflammation, gangrene and pyaemic condition. Character of blood is dark, watery, offensruie and non-coagulable.

Mind : Lachesis patient develops very striking mental symtpoms which are as follows :-

Great loquacity : Wants to talk all the time, but without any relevancy or consistency; no head or tail; jumps from one idea to another, each word leading to a story. The patient thinks that he/she is under the control of some super-human being and has power to bless or curse, even has command over others and actually expects that others should obey him/her. Feels she is empowered from heaven above
to steal and/or to commit murders, etc.

She is possessed of some religious mania and insanity.

She is very JEALOUS AND SUSPICIOUS. The aspect runs through the whole of the mental plane. Suspects everything around her; has no confidence in others.

Dreams of snakes (Lac can.); of own death and funeral, etc.

Sometimes overjoyed and sometimes melancholic and sad, unhappy, depressed; aggravated in the morning on waking.

Memory is weak and there may be inability to think.Feels she is full of wickedness and has committed some serious and unpardonable sin and crime; that she is going to die and will go to hell etc.

All mental symptoms are worse after sleep.

Ailments from ; Long lasting grief, sorrow, fright, jealous, vexation, disappointed love, ete. (Aurum met., Ignatia. Phosphorus). Bad effects of poison, wounds postmortem, suppression of quinine.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Headache in drunkards with high bleod pressure.

Location: Left sided headache, tendency to go to right.

Sensation: As if all the blood has gone towards the head.

Character of headache: Congestive type of headache as if skull would burst.

Character of pain: There is pressing and bursting pain in temples, The head Is very much sensitive to touch.

Modalitiy: Aggravation from motion, pressure, after sleep. Amelioration by menstrual flow (Zincum

met., Allium cepa).

Throat :

Lachesis is especially indicated in tonsillitis and diphtheria,

Location: Begins on the left side and extends to the right.

Sensation: Soreness, dryness and constriction in the throat.

Look of the throat: Dark purple appearence of membrane. Throat seems as a large lump has settled over there. Liquid is more painful than solid                     (Ign., Bell,). When swallowing, throat is very much sensitive to touch. Prostration is odt of all proportion to appearence of                     throat complication.

Modality: Aggravation AFTER SLEEP. FROM HOT DRINK AND FROM TOUCH.

Heart :

There is violent palpitation; must sit up; very restless and trembling. There may be suffocation on lying down. Constrictive feeling in chest, with precordial pain.Unable to lie on left side, with fainting and anxiety. It may also be associated with left sided apoplexy.There is blueness and purple look of the body with collapsed condition; with cold sweat. The patient wants to be fanned but slowly and from a distance. Precordial region is very painful and sensitive to touch.

Epilepsy :
Consequent upon loss of vital fluid, sexual excess, onanism or jealousy, COMES ON ONLY DURING SLEEP (Cuprum met., Bufo. During waking hours, Agaricus mus.).

Female genital organs :

Lachesis has special affinity for female genital organs, especially left ovary, causing Inflammation of glands, cellular tissue and engorgement of veins, showing purple and mottled appearnece.

Concomitants: There may be hot flushes and hot perspiration. Extremes of heat and cold cause great debility. Along with menses, there may be haemorthoids, burning vertex and headache.

Menses : Menses at REGULAR TIME.

Duration: Short.

Quantify: Scanty.

Character of blood: Blood is dark, watery, and non-coagulable.

Modality: All troubles are relieved by menstrual flow (Zincum met., Lac can., Mag. Phos.).

Skin :

Causation: Bad effects of poison, wounds, post mortem, etc. Indicated in boils, carbuncles, ulcers, etc. with intense pain, dark, bluish or purple coloured appearance with tendency to malignancy. Hot haemorrhage with bloody sweat. On the skin there may be numerous ulcers, gangrene and pyaemic condition, malignant and asthenic inflammation from which continuous and profuse blood oozes along with other offensive and ichorous discharges. Look of Skin ; Bluish purple appearence; bolls and carbuncles with purplish surroundings. The
skin is very sensitive to touch.

Character of discharge: The discharges are ichorous and offensive.

Fever:

Lachesis is better indicated in the 2nd and 3rd week of TYPHOID; with stupor or muttering delirium; sunken face; typhoid state, falling of lower jaw; tongue trembles dry and black, protruded with difficulty and catches between the teeth when producing. Perspiration is bloody and cold, stains yellow.There may also be haemorrhage from bowels during typhoid fever due to perforation of intestine, Conjuctiva yellow; great physical exhaustion and trembling of whole body; weakness and sinking feeling.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: AFTER SLEEP (Apis), heat in general, extremes of temperature, alcohol, acids. mercury; quinine, pressure or constriction, summer and heat of sun.

Amelioraion: With appearence of discharge and cold application.

Relations :
Complimentary to: Hepar., Lyco., Nitric acid. In intermittent fever Natrum mur. follows Lachesis when the type changes.

Antidotes: Alum., Bell., Hepar., Merc., Nit. ac., Nux vom.,


CHAPTER:130 LEDUM PALUSTRE

Marsh Tea HAHNEMANN Ericaceae

INTRODUCTION

Ledum is one of the frequently used medicines for injury, skin affections, rheumatic and gouty complaints. It is a remedy gifted by the
vegetable kingdom; particularly so from a wild plant which normally has no utility, But Hahnemann found its usefulness in a number of ailments after potentisation.

CLINICAL

Ascites, Asthma, Bruises, Gout, Injury, Rheumatism, Skin affection, Wounds, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its seat of action is mainly on skin, serous and mucous membranes, fibrous tissues, circulatory system and joints.

PATHOGENESIS

The action of Ledum on skin retards capillary circulation, especially on the external surface of the body and the extremities, resulting in coldness of the surface afed due to its affections on the fibrous tissues and joints, joints are enlatged and become the seats of nodosities and “gout-stones”.

CONSTITUTION

Since it is more or less an acute drug, consideration of constitution is not of much importance. However, Ledum patient is very chilly, with psoric and syphilitic background having rheumatic diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. There is general lack of animal heat; yet heat of bed is intolerable. The patient is unnaturally cold.

2. Complaints of people who are cold all the time; cold to touch but not cold subjectively to patient.

3. In spite of coldness of the body, the symptoms are relieved by cold application (like Secale cor., Rev. of Arsenic).

4. Relief from cold, is so prominent that sometimes the only amelioration is obtained by putting the feet into ice-cold water,

5. Swelling and shooting pain in knees when walking.

6. Stiffness of all joints; can only move them after applying cold.

7. Rheumatism or gout in lower limbs which ascends. (Arnica—descencds, Cacutus and Kalmia).

8. Swelling of feet upto,knees, with unbearable pain when walking as from a sprain or false step; ball of great toe swollen, painful heels as if    bruised.
9. Punctured wounds : From sharp pointed instruments, as awls, rat bites, nails, particularly if the wounded parts are cold.

10. The swellings are pale, sometimes odedematous and aggravated at night in the heat of bed. Uncovering or cold water relieves.

11. Eruptions which burn and sting like the bites or stings of insects.

12. Emaciation of suffering parts, after infected injuries to nerves.

13. Ailments from : Abuse of alcohol, colchicum, injuries from sharp pointed instruments, rat bites, stings of insects especially mosquitos.

PARTICULARS

Eye:

Haemorrhage into interior chamber of eyes after iridectomy (Amica, Ruta).

Cataracts with gout.

Face:

Red pimples on forehead and cheeks, stinging when touched, crusty eruption around nose and mouth.

Injury :

Causation: Punctured wounds, by sharp pointed instruments, as awls, nails, rat bites, mosquito bites or blows.

Location: Punctured wounds anywhere on the body. Haemorrhage into anterior chamber of eyes after iridectomy (Arnica, Ruta). Contusions of eyes and lids, especially if much extravasation of blood, causing ecchymosis of lids and conjunctiva.

Sensation: Pain es if the whole body is bruised and beaten.

Character: Pain in ankles as if sprained or from false step. Pains are of sticking, tearing and throbbing type.

Modalities : Aggravated by motion and at night, by warmth of bed and covering. Amelioration by applying ice-cold water.

Concomitants : Long remaining discolouration after injury. Black and blue places become Steen. Emaciation of affected part (Graphites). Parts are very cold to touch but not cold subjectively to Patient,

Skin:

Causation : Due to injury, loss of vital heat, etc.

Location: Acne on forehead, facial eczema, itching on feet and ankles. Red pimples or tubercles on forehead and cheeks as in brandy drinkers. Stringing when touched, easy spraining of ankles,

Sensation : Pain as if the whole body is bruised and beaten. Pain in ankles as if sprained or from false step. Pains are sticking, tearing and throbbing.

Character : Emaciation of suffering parts. Intense itching of feet and ankles, aggravation from scratching and warmth of bed. Long remaining discolouration after injury. Black and blue places become green. Long continued warm sweat on head and feet.

Swelling : Swelling of feet upto knees with unbearable pain when walking, as from sprain or false step ; ball of great toe is swollen, painful in heels as if bruised.

Abscess and septic conditioos very tender, relieved by cold water.

Modalities : Worse at night, from heat of bed and by scratching but relieved by cold water.

Rheumatism and gout :

In both acute and chronic rheumatism or gout, Ledum is efficacious.

Causation: Due to altered secretion and deposit of solid substances, like uric acid, sodium biurate and other crystals, earthy matter, etc. in the tissues.

Rheumatic and gouty diathesis, have “GOUTSTONES” i.e. stones in the joints like wrist, fingers, toes, etc.

Sensation : Throbbing pain especially in left shoulder. Tearing pain and sticking pain left shoulder and right hip joint.

Location: Small joints like toes, fingers, ankles, wrist.

Character of pain:

(a) In acute type, the joints are swollen and hot. Inflamed parts are red or pale and worse at night. The patient cannot tolerate the heat of bed     and wants to be uncovered.

(b) In chronic type, the joints are swollen and very painful. Painful hard nodules, first in joints of feet and then in hands. Periosteum of      phalanges is very painful on pressure. Usually it affects the left shoulder and right hip (Antim tart., Stram.). The ankles and soles are         very painful and sensitive; can hardly step on them. There is swelling with shooting pain in knees when walking.Stiffness of all joints; can      only move them after applying cold water. Rheumatism and gout begin in lower limbs and ascend. Swelling of feet upto knees, with unbearable       pain when walking as from a sprain of false step; ball of great toes swollen and painful. Pain in heels as if bruised.

Modalities; Worse at night, from heat of bed and on walking. Better from cold water and holding feet in ice-cold water.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From heat of bed, at night, on touch and motion,

Amelioration: From cold, putting feet in icy-cold water.

Relations :

Antidoted by: Camphor.

It antidotes: Apis., China.





CHAPTER:129 LILIUM TIGRINUM

pH Tiger Lily W. PAYNE Liliaceae


INTRODUCTION

Tiger lily is a powerful poison, therefore, a good medicine, says Dr. Tyler. It is a precious remedy for most distressing conditions. Well proved 
and of very definite and distingusihing symptoms, yet not sufficently used and understood is Tiger lily. Unfortunately, this important female 

remedy is unknown to old school practitioners. It is a drug of such vehement action as to be safe and useful only in the hands of those who have 
leamt from Hahnemann how to prepare and prescribe such a remedy.

There are a few intellectual persons possessing poetic faculties, who can better grasp and remember things when presented in rhyme, and for them 
appended below is a Tiger

lily rhyme;—

Tiger lily hurries about, Feels, her insides being all dragged out, Frequent urging to micturition,

Almost approaching a Cantharis condition, Rectal distress a band,

Constricting the heart (just like Cactus grand.), Pulsatilla-like tears, her salvation’s a worry, With silver nitrate, she’s “duties” and hurry.

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris, Constipation, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Eye affection, Heart troubles,Hysteria, Menstrual disorders, Ovarian and Uterine affections, 
Pruritus vulvae, Urinary troubles, Prolapse of uterus, Uterus displacement of, Sub-involution, ete.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Acts especially on pelvic organs; such as uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, brain, the vessel walls and the heart.

PATHOGENESIS

The drug can produce various types of pathological states of the pelvic organs in Seneral and female genital organs in particular. The various clinical symptomatology are due to reflex states dependent on those pathological conditions. It leads to forceful contraction and palpitation of heart.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Especially suited to unmarried woman who suffers from uterine troubles.

Temperament: Irritable, nervous and hysterical temperament. Relation with heat and cold: Very hot patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Affects principally /eft side of the body (Thuja, Lach., Lac can., Berberis vulgaris, Colocynth)

2. Hot Patient: Wants cold air, open air and cool room (Puls., Sabina, Nat. mur.).,

3. Bearing down sensation, dragging sensation in abdomen and pelvis as if all the organs would escape (Murex, Sepia, Bell.),

4. Consolation from others aggravates the sufferings (Nat. mur., Ign., Silicea, Sepia, Halleborus.,—Consolation relieves, Pulsatilla).

5. Frequent urging to urinate.

6. Shifting pain; pain flying from one part to another.

7. Pulsation all over the body (Kreosote) and full, distended feeling as if blood would burst through the vessels.

8. Sensation as if the heart was grasped in a vise (Cactus) as if blood had all gone to heart; feels full to bursting, inability to walk erect.    Clasped and unclasped feeling in heart as if by an iron hand. Rapid heart-beat, 150 to 170 per minute.

9. Mind : It produces various types of mental symptoms which are as follows: - Weeping disposition; can hardly avoid weeping (Puls., Sepia,         
 Med.); very much timid and fearful. There is profound depression of spirit; patient is quite indifferent about what is being done for her,
  
 Consolation aggravates the complaints, Furthermore, there is great irritability of mind. She can hardly speak a decent word to anybody. She    

will snap even when spoken kindly to. She is so irritable that her friends cannot pacify her. There is great fear of being alone, about her       
diseases as if she is incurable, fear of organic disease of heart and insanity etc. The patient is very much hurried and worried; desires to      
do something in a hurried manner; there is aimless hurried motion. There is an irresistible desire to curse and swear (Anac, Lac can.,      
Nit.ac.).The patient tries to describe an indescribable feeling. There is a wild crazy feeling on the vertex as if the ideas are scattered;       
confused ideas. When concentrating the mind upon a particular thing, something else comes back to mind. There is disposition to curse, swear,     
strike or think obscene things. The patient becomes very much listless, yet cannot sit still; restless, yet does not want to walk. She            
sits, broods and thinks over the past. Tormented about her salvation. Great sexual desire. She must keep herself busy to suppresss her sexual     
desire. All the above mentioned mental symptoms alternate with physical symptoms and are more or less due to and arising from or associated     
with uterine symptoms.

PARTICULARS

Uterine symptoms, Prolapse :

There is weakness and atonic condition of pelvic tissues, uterus and ovaries resulting in anteversion, retroversion, subinvolution from paralytic 
condition. There is GREAT BEARING DOWN SENSATION, dragging sensation in abdomen and pelvis as if all the organs would escape (Lac can., Sepia, 
Murex, Bell.); relieved by supporting the vulva with hands.Here it differs from SEPIA. Both have got bearing down sensation and intolerance of 
sympathy. Both support the vulva during prolapse, but Lilium tig. feels heat more abd Sepia feels cold more. Sepia is INDIFFERENT AND APATHETIC 
whereas Lilium is always hurried and worried. Tiger lily craves meat while Sepia has got aversion to meat. Sepia has no sexual desire. Tiger lily 
has great sexual desire, nevertheless, in order to suppress the sexual desire, she keeps herself busy.

Menses :
Time: Too early.

Quantity: Scanty.

Character of blood: Very much dark and offensive.

Character of flow: Flow only when moving about. Flow ceases when she stops walking.

Character of pain: Shifting pain in small spots that can be covered with the tip of a finger (Kali bich., Ign.).

Concomitants: Bearing down sensation, dragging sensation in abdomen and pelvis as if all the organs would escape; relieved by supporting the 
vulva with hands.

Constipation :

Causation: Inactivity of rectum.

During stool: There is great tenesmus in rectum with MUCH URGING. Sits for a long time in the closet to pass stool. Although there is great 
urging and greatstraining, no stool or little stool passes out. Along with frequent urging to stool, there is sensation of a ball in the rectum. 
Due to retrovefsion of uterus, there is sensation as if the rectum were full of faeces, which brings on repeated urging to stool and the patient 
sits and only strains but no stool passes out. With desrie for stool and bearing down sensation in abdomen, there is great pressure in rectum.


Urine :

Great tenesmus of bladder. The patient sits for a long time to urinate. Frequent urging to urinate. If the desire is not attended to, there is sensation of congestion in the chest. Urine is milky, scanty and very hot.

Heart : All the heart symptoms are associated with and arise as reflex symptoms of uterine troubles.

Sensation: As if the heart was grasped in a vise (Cactus) as if all the blood has rushed to the heart which feels and seems like bursting. Great palpitation with fluttering, faint, hurried and anxious feeling about the apex.

Pain: Sharp pain in left chest, shifting in nature, flying from one part to another and can be covered with tip of a finger.
Pain in the cardiac region with feeling of load on chest. 

Pulse : Pulse is very much rapid and irregular, with rapid heart beat, 150 to 170 per minute.

Modality: Aggravation after eating, lying on either side.

Concomitants: Pulsation all over the body. Full distended feeling, as if blood would burst through the vessels. Heart symptoms alternate with               uterine troubles.

Sweat :

There is coldness of the whole body, extremities cold and covered with cold sweat.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: By consolation and in a warm room.

Amelioraton: In open fresh air.

Relations :
Compare: Cactus, Murex, Sepia.
Antidoted by: Platina, Nux v., Puls.




CHAPTER :130 LITHIUM CARBONICUM

Carbonate of Lithium DR. HERING LixCO,

INTRODUCTION

Dr. Constantine Hering introduced and made the first provings of Lithium Carb.

CLINICAL

Eyes-affection of. Gastralgia. Headache. Heart-affection of. Prostatitis. Gout. Rheumatism.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Uric-acid diathesis.

2) “Soreness” is the one of the great characteristics of Lith. Carb. Like Arnica, bones, joints, muscles whole body sore as if beaten.

3) Rheumatic & Gouty symptoms: Lithium Garb, has Rheumatic and gouty diathesis. This is an invaluable; remedy in chronic rheumatism when
   accompained with heart or eye symptoms and recurring attacks of acute inflammation of the small joints. Another peculiarity of this rheumatism    consists in the appearance of an erup-tion on the affected part. There is great tenderness, swel-ling and redness of the joints.

Modalities :

Worse : At night or in morning.

Better : Rising or moving about ; hot water.

4) Heart symptoms : Heart symptoms when associated with rheumatic symptoms. There is Rheumatic soreness in cardiac region. Throbbing, dull stitch
in cardiac reg-ion. Throbbing and fluttering in heart, extending to back.

Modalities :

Aggravation : Bending forward. Before urination.

Amelioration : After urinating.

5) Urinary symptoms : Urine of Lith. Carb, is turbid, strong, scanty flocculent and full of uric acid deposits while passing urine, flashes of .pain are felt in the region of the bladder, extending into spermatic cord and patient may feel pressure in heart. Pain in right kidney & ureter.

6) Eye symptoms : There is sensation of dryness and pain in eyes after reading. It has. entire vanishing of right half of whatever the patient    looks at. It may be the result of excessive use of eyes with insufficient light or direct exposure to the blinding effects of strong sunlight.

7) Stomach symptoms : Gnawing in stomach with pain in left temple better by eating. Nausea better by eating. Acidity. Patient cannot tolerate    slightest pressure of clothes from fullness in pit of stomach.

8) Headache ceases while eating. There is a tension as if bound. Better by sitting up and going out.

9) Many symptoms of Lith. Carb, have concomitants in other parts.

10) Ailments from—Bruises, falls.

11) General modalities :

Agg.—In morning, at night, right side.

Ame.—Rising, moving about.





CHAPTER :131 LYCOPODIUM CLAVATUM
pe
Wolf's Claw; HAHNEMANN Lycopodiaceae
Club Moss

INTRODUCTION

According to Darwin’s Theory of evolution, moss was the first plant in the vegetable kingdom to take shape in the world. Ordinarily,
moss has got very little or no value; on the other hand, occasionally it proves to be a nuisance to farmer. The fact is that it possesses immense
inherent curative power in latent and dormant state in its crude form, for, people in extremes of life, could only be found out by the deep penetrating intelligence of Hahnemann. When this power is dynamically aroused, it finds its respectable place in the hands of every Homoeopath, bringing in immense relief to thousands of suffering people Lycopodium is a wonderful CONSTITUTIONAL, DEEP ACTING REMEDY FOR
DEEP SEATED, PROGRESSIVE CHRONIC DISEASES. It is nicknamed as “Vegetable Sulphur”.

CLINICAL

Abdomen distended, Aneurysm, Asthma, Bililousness, Cancer, Constipation, Consumption, Cough, Colic, Diphtheria, Dysentery, Dyspepsia, Eczema, Flatulence, Gall- stone, Gout, Headache, Heartburn, Hernia, Hysteria, Impotency, Liver affection, Locomotor ataxy, Lung affection, Male and female pexual orgns, Menstrual disorders, Physometra, Pneumonia, Renal colic, Rheumatism, Stomach disorders, Throat affection, Typhoid fever, Urinary troubles, Whooping cough, Worms, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts powerfully upon the vegetative system specially upon the mucous membrane of respiratory tract, dfgestfae system, genito-urinary tract, kidney etc. It shows its most important: local action upon the liver and digestive tract.

PATHOGENESIS

It depresses the vegetative system causing slowly, advancing weaknes and decay of tissues, Acting upon the genito-urinary tract and kidney, it produces lithic and uric acid, diathesis. On the liver and digestive system, it disturbs the digestion and produces Constipation. The lymphatic system becomes weak and thereby their glands are swollen and indurated, especially of the neck.





CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: It has Grauvogl’s Carbonitrogenoid constitution. Suited especially for extremes of life, both for children and old people. 
Lycopodium patients are INTELLECTUALLY KEEN, BUT PHYSICALLY WEAK. Upper part of the body ig emaciated, lower part semi-dropsical. Unhealthy 
complexion, anaemic and pale complexion, looks older than he is (Arg. nit., Sanicula, Kreosote, Secale cor., Flouric atid),

Relation with heat and cold: The patient is sensitive to cold and there is marked lack of vital heat and worse in general from cold and cold-air and from cold food and drink (Kent).

Miasm: Lycopodium covers all the three miasms. It is anti-psoric, anti-syphilitic and anti-sycotic.

Diathesis: Lithic and uric acid diathesis, pre-disposed to lung and hepatic affections (Sulph., Calc. Phos).

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It is a leading RIGHT SIDED REMEDY. Suited for deep chronic, progressive diseases. Complaints start on right side arid go left-throat, chest,    abdomen, liver, ovary, kidney, etc.

2. Nearly all diseases are WORSE IN THE AFTERNOON FROM 4 TO 8 P.M. This is a very strong feature of Lycopodium.

3. Sourness of the discharges: Everything tastes sour, e.g. eurctation, heart-burn water-brash, sour vomiting.

. Intolerance of cold drinks; craves everything warm.

. Desire for sweet things: warm food and drink. Aversion to tobacco, bread, coffee. Cannine hunger, but a few mouthfuls fill up to the throat.

. Acidity, wind and bloating of abdomen, especially the lower abdomen.

. Red sand in urine. Child cries before urinating. Coon nan sp

. Impotency of young men from onanism or sexual excess.

10. Constipation since puberty, since last confinement, when away from home.

11. Dryness of vagina, burning, during and after coition.

12. Right sided hernia is successfully treated by this drug.

13. Hemiopia: ses only the left half of the object (Aurum met., sees only lower half).

14. Fan-like movements of alae nasi occurring in cerebral and abdominal complaints.

15. “Half-open condition of the eyes during sleep” is a strong indication for Lyco.

16. Right foot hot and the left cold.

17. Dryness of the parts such as vagina and skin especially palms, also suggests Lyco.

18. Mind : The mental symtpoms of Lycopodium are numerous and very characteristic. The patient is tired; he has a very tired state of mind, a     
chronic fatigue. Dread of appearing in public, often in professional man like lawyers and ministers who have to appear in public, there is a 
feeling of complete incompetence and inability to undertake the task, although he has been accustomed to it for many years. A laywer cannot think 
of appearing in court; he delays, until he is obliged to appear because he has a fear that he will stumble, that he will make mistakes, that he 
will forget and yet when he undertakes, he goes through with ease, competency and comfort.Furthermore the patient wants to be alone; yet has 
drend of solitude. The patient dreads the presence of new persons, or visitors. She wants to be only with those who are constantly surrounding 
her, but also does not want to be entirely alone; wants to feel that there is somebody else in the house, but does not want company, does

not want to be talked to or forced to do anything. Desire to be alone. Wants to keep silent; yet very glad to feel that-there is somebody else in 
the house. The patient prefers to remain in a room by herself but wants to have somebody in the adjacent room. Great anticipation: Lack of 
confidence, weakness of memory; confused thoughts; loss of confidence in himself.

Easily angered; cannot endure opposition or contradiction Seeks dispute. Greedy and miserly, malicious, avaricious and pusillanimous; very much sensitive; even cries when thanked.FOR PERSONS INTELLECTUALLY KEEN, BUT PHYSICALLY WEAK, it is very useful.

19. Ailments from : Fright, anger, mortificaion or vexation with reserved displeasure (Staph.).

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache arising from or associated with; gastric troubles; headache if the patient does Not eat.

Time: Periodic headache.

Location: Right sided headache; starts in the right side and goes to the left.

Sensation: Pressing sensation as if the head would burst.

Character of headache: Congestive tuype of headache; the headache is of throbbing and pressing type.

Modalities: Worse from 4 TO 8 P.M. right-sided, from heat or warm. room. Amelioration from uncovering the head and by eating,

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Mouth : Dryness of mouth and tongue without thrist. Tongue dry black, cracked, trembling; sour taste in the mouth.

Liver : In hepatic diseases such as Jaundice, infective hepatitis, etc. the right hypochondrium is swollen. The liver is very much sensitive; pain shooting across lower abdomen, from right to left. Aching and drawing type of pain in the region. There is constant sense of fermentation in the abdomen, immediately after a light meal, abdomen is bloated; recurrent bilious attack with vomiting of bile.

Abdomen : There is CANINE HUNGER. The more he eats the more he craves; headache if he does not eat; despite insatible appetite A FEW MOUTHFULS FILL UP TO THE THROAT. There is EXCESSIVE ACCUMULATION OF GAS AND FLATULENCE ESPECIALLY IN THE LOWER .ABDOMEN WITH loud grumbling and croaking, rolling of flatus as though fermentation was going on, but not relieved by passing flatus and eructation. Lycopodium patients are always belching. They have eructations that are sour and acrid. “SOUR STOMACH’, sour vomiting flatus, eructations, heartburn and water-brash, worse by cold drink and often relieved by warm drinks. The accumulation of gas, flatulence, water-brash, heartburn, all are worse in the evening FROM 4 TO 8 P.M.

Constipation : Constipation of infants; since puberty or last confinement, when away from home with ineffectual urging. Rectum contracts and protrudes during stool. Along with it there is developing piles, contraction of sphincter ani.

Respiratory System :

Throat : Lycopodium is an excellent remedy for affections of throat, such as in diptheria, tonsillitis, laryngitis, pharyngitis, etc.

Location: Complaints start on the right side and goes to the left.

Sensation: Constructive feeling in the throat.

Look of the throat: Brownish, red colour of membrane. Stitching pain in the throat, aching
drawing type of pain.

Modalities: Aggravation: FROM 4—8 P.M. after sleep and FROM COLD DRINKS.

Amelioration: By warm drink.

Pneumonia : Lycopodium is an infallibe remedy for pneumonia too. It is generally indicated in advance stage; in neglected or maltreated or in delayed resolution stage of pneumonia.

Site: Lower lobe of right lung is usually affected (Chelidonium, Bryonia, Merc.sol., Kali carb.).

Character of cough: Deep, hollow, shattering cough.

Character of sputa: Large quantity of thick, yellow, puruleiit mucous affording little or no relief. Sputa is greenish yellow, dirty or foetid.

Look of the face: During pneumonia, the face is cyanosed, shallow and unhealthy complexion and cold face. There is furrowing of forehead and fan-like motion of alae nasi.

Concomitants: With the above symptoms, there may be fan-like motion of alae nasi and pulse
accelerated (Phos., Antim. tart.).

Modality: WORSE FROM 4-8 P.M., right side.

Urinary Symptoms :
Lycopodium is often indicated and found quite suitable IN RIGHT SIDED RENAL COLIC.

Character of pain: There is terrible pain along the course of the right kidney and ureter, drawing, aching pain.
Child cries before urination (Borax).

Character of Urine: RED SAND IN URINE; urine Is dark, red or albuminous with strangury; scanty urine during day and copious and frequent at night.


-
Lycopodium Clavatum . ae

Concomitants: With the above symptoms, there may be severe backache which is relieved after urination (Medo.).

Modality:

© Aggravation: FROM 4-8P.M. before urination.
© Amelioration: Kidney pain (backache) is relieved after urination (Medo.)

sexual Symptoms :

(a) Male : Impotency of young men; from onanism or sexual excess. Penis is small, relaxed and cold. Old men with strong desire, but imperfect     erection. Patient falls asleep during an embrace, with premature emission. There may also be enlarged prostatetn old people.

b) Female : Dryness of vagina with burning during and after coition which is very painful. Discharge of blood from vagina after every stool.

Physometra: Escape of flatus from the vagina (Lac can., Nux mos., Sanguinaria, Brom.). Foetus appears to be turning somersaults.


Baby :
Look of the baby: Old looking baby; weak and emaciated with well developed head, but puny, sick-body, upper part of the body is emaciated and lower part semi-dropsical.

Mind :
Mentally the baby is very much irritable, peevish, cross on waking, ugly, kicks off and screams. Baby cries all day and sleeps all night (rev. of Psorinum, Lac can.). Snuffles of children. Nose stops at night; must breathe through the mouth. Child starts rubbing its nose during sleep.

Hunger: There is CANINE HUNGER, but a few mouthful fills upto the throat with distended abdomen.

Urine: Child cries before urinating. There is RED SAND IN URINE on child’s diaper.

Desire: The baby has intense craving for sweet.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Nearly all complaints are AGGRAVATED FROM 4-8 P.M. (Hell. 4-9 p.m., Colocynth, Mag. phos.), right side, from heat, warm air, EXCEPT THROAT AND STOMACH.

Amelioration: From warm food and drink (only stomach and throat symptoms): from uncovering the head and loosening the garments, in open air.
Relations :

Complementary to: lodium.

Follows well: After Calcarea, Carbo veg., Lachesis, Sulphur.

It is rarely advisable to begin the treatment of a chronic disease with Lyco., unless clearly indicated.

It is better to give another anti-psoric first.

Lycopodium is a deep seated, long acting remedy.

Should rarely be repeated after improvement begins.

N.B. : A dose of Carbo. Veg., evey 8th day facilitates action in Lyco.

Antidoted by: Camphor, Caust., Cham., Coffea., Graph., Nux v., Puls.
It Antidotes: Merc.

CHAPTER:133 LYSSIN (HYDROPHOBINUM)

The Saliva of Rabid dog DR. HERING A Nosode (of rabies) (First proved in 1833)

INTRODUCTION

Deep acting constitutional medicine. Polychrest remedy. (An analogue of many animal poisons especially Lachesis & Vipera).

CLINICAL

Convulsions. Diarrhoea. Dysentery. Headache. Hydrophobia. Leucorrhoea. Lysophobia. Mania. Paralysis. Prolapse Satyriasis. Throat complaints. Urinary complaints.Wounds and Ulcers.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It affects principally the nervous system, then oesophagus, female genitalia etc.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) The sight or sound of running water or pouring water, even thinking of it aggravates all complaints.

2) Cannot bear heat of sun (Gels., Glon., Lach., Nat.Mur)

3) Excessive sensitiveness to external stimuli like sound, noises, air, running water,light etc.

4) Profuse salivation—Saliva is tough, ropy, viscid, frothy with constant spitting.

5) Hypersensitiyeness to smell (esp.of tobacco) taste, touch.

6) Dysphagia, even spasm of oesophagus from swallowing liquids.

7) Craving for salt and aversion to fat food.

8) Ravenous hunger or anorexia,

9) Complete absence of thirst or great thirst for cold water but unable to drink.

10) Frequent desire to urinate on seeing running water (Cantharis, Sulphur).

11) Complaints resulting from abnormal sexual desire, (from abstinence, Conium.)

12) Long lasting prolapse of uterus, rectum or any organ.

13) Sleep—Persistent insomnia is another characteristic of Lyssin.

14) Delayed healing of wounds, ulcers, sinuses etc. Bluish discolouration of wounds (Lach.)

15) Mind—The mental symptoms of Lyssin are very striking and are as follows—

The patient is highly impulsive especially of destructive nature, e.g. desires to kill himself or some other. Patient suffers from Lyssophobia that is intense fear of becoming mad. The chain of strange thoughts and ideas always circulate, fill-his mind. Great apprehension as if something terrible is going to happen is another guiding feature of Lyssin. He may suffer from violent mania of any kind. Rapid speech and impatience are very notice-able. There is state of confusion, patient reses his self-identity and very often asks “who am I” ?  Mental emotion or mortifying news always makes him worse.

Causation : History of dog bite (whether rabid or not), abnormal sexual desire, mental emotion or exertion, mortifying or bad news etc.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

It is usually needed in chronic headache from bites of dog or from mental emotion of exertion.

Location : There is violent headache from temple to temple, also frontal.

Sensation : Pain as if head would burst.

Character of pain: Maddening, outward pressing pain in forehead; patient presses his head against the wall, beating and throbbing pain with                    peculiar lightness of head.

Modalities : Aggravation on seeing water, during day, from writing. Amelioration from cold air.

Concomitant : Headache with dizziness, nausea, and backache. It may alternate with hot flushes in face.

Convulsions :

From dazzling or reflected light from water or mirror (Stram.); from even thinking of fluids of any kind; from slightest touch or current of air.

Throat:

Sore throat, constant desire to swallow (Lac.Can., Merc.) Difficulty in swallowing ; even spasm of oesophagus from swallowing liquids; gagging 
when swallowing water. Saliva is tough, ropy, viscid, frothy in mouth and throat with constant spitting. (Hydr.)

Male :

Lascivious; priapism, with frequent emissions. Complaints from abnormal sexual desire. Atrophy of testicles. No emission during coition.

Female :

Sensitivenes of vagina, rendering coition painful. Conscious of womb.

Prolapsus uteri; many cases of years standing cured.

Stool : Desire for stool on hearing or seeing running water. Profuse, watery stools, with pain in bowels; worse evening.

General Modalities:

Aggravation: Sight or sound of water, bright dazzling light, carriage riding.

Relations :

Compare : Bell., Canth., Stram in hydrophobia.





CHEAPTER: 134 MAGNESIA CARBONICA

Carbonate of HAHNEMANN (MgCO3),Mg Magnesium (OH), + SH,O



INTRODUCTION

Magnesia carbonica was used in ancient days in the form of Gregory's Powder, other constituents being Rhubarb and Ginger. This
powder was used, to sweeten the stomach; hence occupied a position of much repute in the Allopathic Nursery. The properties of Mag. carb., from the old school’s stand point are summed up as “Laxative, antacid and antilithic’. In Homoeopathy we use it with great advantage for complaints arising in people who have been taking the drug to “sweeten the stomach”.

CLINICAL

Acidity, Catarrh, Constipation, Cough, Diarrhoea, Dyspepsia, Flatulence, Menstrual disorders, Neuralgia, Pregnancy—nausea of, Toothache, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts especially on the gastro-intestinal system, liver and also female genital organs. It also has got action over the nerve, especially the facial and dental nerves.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces gastro-intestinal catarrh with marked hyper acidity and sour diarrhoea. 

It also causes nervous exhaustion and sleeplessness.



CONSTITUTION

Physical make up: It is especially suited to women having broken down or worn-out constitution with uterine and climacteric disorders and with lax fibres and sour smell of the whole body.

Temperament: Nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Very much sensitive to cold air.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Aggravation of all the symptoms, especially pains from rest and relieved by walking about.


2. The patients are extremely sensitive both mentally and physically, e.g., sensitive to touch, cold air, etc.

3. Extreme acidity and sourness which run throughout the length and breadth of Mag. carb.,(N.M. Choudhury),e.g, sour eructation, sour vomiting    and sour stool.

. Inordinate craving for meat in children.

. Milk passes undigested in nursing children. (Milk causes diarrhoea, Natrum carb.),

. The stool is GREEN, FROTHY, LIKE SCUM ON A FROG POND.

. Menstrual flow ONLY AT NIGHT OR WHEN LYING DOWN, ceases when walking (Kreosote, Amrnon. carb ; rev. of Cactus Causticum, Sabina, Bovista).

. The whole body feels tired and painful, especially the legs and feet.

. A remedy for nerve exhaustion resulting in nervous irriation and sleeplessness. Unrefreshing sleep; more tired on rising than when retiring.

10. Craving for meat and acids and fruits; aversion to milk. Naan

11. Intense neuralgic toothache and nausea during pregnancy reminds one of Mag. carb.

12. Facial neuralgia of left side shooting like lightning, worse from touch, change of temperature; cannot stay in bed, must walk on the floor.

13. Mind : Mentally the patient is very nervous, sad, despondent and morose; constaot absence of mind. The patient is extremely sensitive to         noise; slightest noise irritates him.

14. Ailments from : Dentition, milk, mental distress, shocks and blows.

PARTICULARS

Headache : There is neuralgic pain and headache.

Location: Headache is felt on the left side.

Sensation: As if the hair was pulled out (Hypericum).

Character: Sticking pain on the side of head on which he lies. Lightning type of pain makes the patient get up and walk.

Modalities: Worse from mental exertion and better from walking about.

Toothache : Toothache appears especially DURING PREGNANCY Root of the tooth is more affected.

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Abdomen : ACIDITY, FLATULENCE AND DYSPEPSIA are very well-marked.

© Location: Especially in the right iliac region.

* Sensation: Heaviness with rumbling and gurgling in abdomen.

© Character: There is heart burn with sour belching and eructation. There may also be vomiting of bitter water. Pain in the stomach after eating               even a normal quantity of food; feels bloated after-eating, much flatulence after gating. There is inordinate craving for meat,              acids and fruits and aversion to milk.




Magnesia Vatboniea
Diarrhoea :

Time: Occurs regularly every three weeks.

Character of stool Green, watery, frothy, LIKE A FROG POND SCUM, white very much sour
with great tenesmus. Milk passes undigested in nursing children.

Character of pain: Diarrhoea is preceded by severe cutting doubling up colic.

Modality: Aggravation after taking milk.

Female genital organs :

Menses : Usually Mag. carb., is indicated in DYSMENORRHOEA.

° Time: Too late.

© Quantity: Scanty.

© Character of blood: Very much acrid, dark, pitch-like, very difficult to wash off (Med.).

¢ Before menses: Sore throat with coryza and nasal stoppage (Lac can.).

During menses: There is labour like pain; cutting colicky pain in the abdomen with severe backache, weakness and chilliness. Flow only at night during sleep or WHEN LYING DOWN. Ceases when walking (Kreosote, Ammon. carb.—rev. of Lilium tig.).

Baby :

Look of the baby: Especially in children of tubercular parents there is tendency to marasmus.

The child’s muscles are flabby. The child will not thrive in spite of good feeding. Emaciation is more markd on the back of the head.

Mind: Mentally the baby is very much irritable, puny and sickly in appearance. The whole body of the baby smells sour e.g. sweat, urine, stool, etc.

Stool: Mag. carb. produces inactivity of the rectum and anus. The ‘stool is large, hard, and’crumbling. Stool is partly expelled and their crumble and break up in many pieces.

When diarrhoea sets in, the stool is green, watery, frothy like frqg-pond-scum, STOOL IS VERY MUCH SOUR SMELLING, with great tenesmus.

Desires and aversions: The baby has inordinate craving for mea( and aversion to milk which, if taken passes out undigested in nursing children.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Warmth of bed, change of weather, every 3 weeks, rest, milk, during menses.

Amelioration: Warm air and walking in open air.

Relations :

Complementary: Chamomilla.

Antidoted by:Arsenic, Mercurius, Nux vom., Puls., Rheum,

It Antidotes: Acetic acid.






CHAPTER :135 MAGNESIA MURIATICA

Chloride of Magnesia HAHNEMANN Mg 

INTRODUCTION

Magnesia Muriatica is the most neglected liver remedy in our Materia Medica. It is particularly a woman’s remedy who suffers from hysterical complaints with uterine diseases and indigestion.

CLINICAL

Cardialgia, Constipation, Dyspepsia. Diarrhoea. Dysmenorrhoea. Headache. Hysteria. Leucorrhoea. Liver complaints. Toothache.

SPHERE OF ACTION

Gastro intestinal tract, liver, nerves, uterus, heart, urinary bladder.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up—It is especially suited to hysterical nervous women who suffer from hepatic and uterine disorders. Puny, rachitic children during dentition, Relation with heat & cold—chilly patient. Miasm—Psora.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Patient, though chilly, desires fresh open air which relieves.

2) Great sensitivenes to noise (Phos., Theridion., Nux Vom.)

3) Affections of the right side with liver affections.

4) Stool dry, knotty, difficult to evacuate, like sheep dung crumbling at verge of anus (Ammon Mur., Nat.Mur.)

5) Great tendency to head-sweat. (Calc. Sil., Sani.)

6) Pressing pain in enlarged liver, pain radiates to spine. Aggravation by lying on right side, better by hard pres-sure.

7) Profuse dark pitch like menses with cramps, backache, pain in thighs and indigestion.

8) Leucorrhoea after every stool, two weeks after menses.

9) Craving for sugar.

10) Intolerance of milk.

11) Aggravation while sitting.

12) Palpitation relieved by motion or lying on left side.

13) Continual rising of white froth into the mouth.

14) Eructations tasting like rotten eggs (Arn., Ant.T., Graph. Psor).

15) Headache : Worse from motion and in open air better from strong pressure and wrapping up warmly (Sil., Stron.)

16) Urine, Pale, yellow can only be passed by pressing abdominal muscles.

17) Ailments from—Sea bathing.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Sine : Every six weeks.

Location : Forehead and around the eyes.

Sensation : As if it would burst.

Character of headache : Congestive headache at menstrual period in hysterical women.

Modalities : Aggravation—from motion, in open air.

Amelioration : From lying down, strong pressure, wrapping up warmly.

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms

Mouth : Blisters on lips. A coated large flabby yellow tongue. Tongue feels burnt. Swollen and easily bleeding gums. Toothache unbearable when food touches the teeth.

Stomach : Appetite poor, bad taste in mouth. Eructations like rotten eggs. Continued rising-of white froth into mouth. Cannot digest milk, it causes pain in stomach and passes undigested. Complaints aggravated from salty food & sea bathing.

Liver: Chronic liver complaints with tenderness and pressing pain extending to-spine and epigastrium. Enlarged, sore mvt with flatulence.

Aggravation : Lying on right side, after food.

Amelioration : By hard pressure.

Constipation : It is mostly indicated in obstinate constipation and of infants during dentition. The characteristic stool is hard, knotty, scanty, passes with difficulty with crumbling at verge of anus. After stools rectum feels sore & painful. Constipation at sea (Bry., Platina.)

Menses : The flow is black and clotted. Profuse at night, in bed causing hysterical symptoms. The Menstrual pain is generally relieved by having back pressed. There is great excitement at every period, and pains in the back while walking and in the thighs when sitting. Eruptions on face and forehead worse before menses.

Leucorrhoea : After exertion, after every stool, or following uterine spasm. It may be followed by Metrorrhagia. Leucorrhoea two weeks after menses for three or four days.

General modalities :

Aggravation—Lying on right side, sea bathing, immediately after eating.

Amelioration—From pressure, motion, open air (except headache).

Relations :

Antidotes : Cham. Camph.
Compare : Chamomilla in diseases of children.





CHAPTER :136


MAGNESIA PHOSPHORICA


Phosphate of HAHNEMANN MgHPO,7H,0 Magnesium

INTRODUCTION

Phosphate of magnesium is one of the most important of the twelve tissue remedies. It is a precious gem derived from biochemical studies of
Dr. Schuessler the father of Twelve Tissue Remedies. This salt is one of the important constituents of various cells in our body, especially blood corpuscles, muscles, brain, spinal marrow and various other tissues. Disturbance of its molecules results in pain, cramps and paralysis. In Homoeopathy it was MASTER HAHNEMANN who first used it in the treatment of dysmenorrhoea. He remarked that “Mag. phos.” is one of the greatest, if not the greatest of the remedies for dysmenorrhoea, but only one of its own kind. N.M. CHOUDHURY also says that a careful study of Mag. phos. will convince every student of Homoeopathy, the utter need of discrimination, careful cool judgment and a constant burning of incense before the Goddess of Materia Medica.

CLINICAL

Colic, Convulsion, Cough, Dentition, Headache, Intercostal neuralgia, Locomotor ataxia, Menstrual disorders, Neuralgia, Toothache, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Especially it acts upon brain, nerves, muscles, intestine and uterus.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces neuralgic pain in the head, teeth, etc. which is sharp, cutting, lightning like, shooting and almost unbearable. It also produces spasmodic pain, especially in the abdomen.


CONSTITUTION

Physical make up: Mag. phos. is especially adapted to the affection of thin, emaciated persons of a highly nervous organisation and of dark complexion. Jt affects, right side of the body. Hering says that it is suited to young and very strong persons and teething children.

Temperament: Nervous temperament.


Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background. agiiesia Priospngre

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It affects the right side of the body, generally head, ear, face, chest, ovary, sciatic nerve (Chel., Lyco., Ciusticum, Kali carb., Bry.,    Mere. sol.).

2. Great desire of cold air, of uncovering, of touching the affected part, of cold, of bathing or washing.

3. Colicky pain in abdomen forcing the patient to bend double, RELIEVED BY HEAT AND WARMTH. RUBBING AND HARD PRESSURE (colocynth).

4. It is the best medicine for all sorts of pain, especially CRAMPING. SHOOTING LIKE A LIGHTNING. Pains are sharp, cutting, stabbing, stitching,    lightning like coming and going rapidly. The pain rapidly changes from place to place. It is RELIEVED BY HEAT, WARMTH AND BY PRESSURE but    aggravated by COLD IN GENERAL, from motion and in open air.
   
. During menses, pain is relieved when flow begins (Lach., Zincum met.).

. All the symptoms are worse from 4-9 p.m. (Colocynth).

. Enuresis after catheterization.

. Ailments from : Standing in cold water or working.with cold clay; dentition, cold winds, cold water, catheterization. on nan

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Suitable specially for headache of school girls (Calc, phos., Nat. mur., Psor., Tuber.).

Causation: From cold air.

Location: Right sided headache.

Sensation: As if a cap is on head.

Character of headache: Headache begins jn the occiput and extends over the head, especially in right side (Sang., Sil.) with sudden flushes and red face. Pain is neuralgic in character. The pain is darting, stabbing, shooting, stitching and rapidly changing. Pain comes suddenly and goes suddenly.

Modalities: Aggravation from 10 to 11 a.m., or 4 to 5 p.m. from mental exertion or hard study, emotion, touch, open air, and relieved by external heat, hard pressure and rubbing.

Neuralgia :

Mag. phos. is one of the GREAT ANTI NEURALGIC REMEDIES, Neuralgia, especially of face, supra or intra orbital; right sided neuralgia. It is sharp, shooting, cutting and is almost unendurable. The pain darts along the course of a nerve like a lightning flash and rapidly changes place. There is intermittent Paroxysm which is almost unbearable driving the patient to frenzy. The pains are aggravated by motion and DRAUGHT OF COLD AIR and are invariably better BY HEAT, WARMTH, pressure and bending double.

Toothache :

Ulceration of teeth, with severe neuralgic pain. There is sharp, cutting, stabbing, shooting pain in lightning like flash and rapidly changing place. Comes in intermittent paroxysms, almost unbearable,


Modalities: Toothache is aggravated at night, from eatinc, drinking, especially cold things and relieved by heat (relieved by cold-Bryonia, Puls., Coffea).

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Colic : For abdominal colic, Mag. phos. is an excellent remedy.

Location: Pain at the pit of stomach or anywhere in the abdomen.

Sensation: Bloated; full sensation in stomach.

Character of pain: Sharp, cutting, stabbing, shooting, stitching type of pain, coming and going like a_ lightning. Cramping pain, there is intermittent type of pain, comes in paroxysm, unbearable, rapidly changing place. Pain compels the patient to bend double. Great distension of abdomen. The patient wants to loosen clothing, walks about and constantly passes flatus which gives no relief. The tongue is clean.

Modalities:

© Aggravation from touch.

° Amelioration: By rubbing, warmth and pressure.

Here it differs from Colocynth. Both have got severe colic making the patient to bend double; both are relieved by warmth and hard pressure. But the colic is not so markedly relieved by heat in Colocynth as in. Mag. phos. but is relieved by pressure. Mag. phos. has right sided colic, buj Colocynth usually left sided. Anger with indignation is the causative factor in Colocynth, but not in Mag. phos. In Mag. phos., the colic is not so markedly relieved by pressure, bdt is relieved by heat. MAG. PHOS. SHOULD BE USED WHEN COLOCYNTH FAILS TO RELIEVE.

Menses :

In membranous dysmenorrhoea, Mag. phos,. is of great help.

Time: Too early.

Character of flow: Flow dark and stringy (Crocus, Ust.).

Character of pain: Severe pain in the abdomen, especially right sided. The pain is sharp, cutting, stabbing, shooting, stitching, coming and going like a lightning, unbearable pain, driving the patient to frenzy, rapidly changing place and cramping pain.

Modalities:
 Aggravation: Pain is aggravated before the flow begins.

 Amelioration: When the flow begins (Lach,, Zincum met.) by lying on right side and by heat and bending double.



General Modalities :

Aggravation: from cold air, draught of cold air or cold wind, cold bathing or washing, motion and touch.

Amelioration: By bending double, heat, warmth and pressure.

Relations :

Antidoted by: Belladonna, Gels, Lachesis.

Compare: Colocynth, Cham.






CHAPTER :137 MEDORRHINUM

The Gonorrhoeal SWAN A. Nosode Cocei

INTRODUCTION

Medorrhinum is one of the greatest constitutional remedies contributed by Hahnemann to Materia Medica. Although Thuja claims to be the king of anti-sycotic remedies, in actual effect, Medorrhinum ranks PARI PASSU with the “KING” and merits the consideration of having an equally wide range of action as that of Thuja. Having been derived from the Gonorrhoeal cocci, it has been found most efficacious in eradicating any and_ every complaint, by whatever name they are called, brought on and consequent upon Gonorrhoea. The dormant curative power of the same contagious principle has been utilised, through potentisation, for complete annihilation of all diseases and manifestations produced by gonococcus itself. Master Hahnemann found’ in the Gonorrhoeal cocci the immense.curative value of not only all diseases of sycotic origin, but also diseases caused by psora and syphilis. MEDORRHINUM bears the same relation to deep seated sycotic chronic affections of spinal cord and the sympathetic nervous system as PSORINUM does to deep seated chronic affections of skinand mucous membrane and SYPHILINUM to all syphilitic affections.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Asthma, Cough, Diabetes, Epilepsy, Eye affection, Gonorrhoea suppressed, Headache, Liver affection, Mental disorders, Nocturnal enufesis, Paralysis, Rheumatism, Throat and Lung affections, Urinary troubles, Tumours, Warts, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Medorrhinum predominantly affects the nervous system, brain, spinal cord and its meninges, mind, lymphatics, skin and mucous membane, joints, cardio-vascular and respiratory system, gastro intestinal tract, female genital organs, urinary and sexual organs, all troubles which can be traced to a sycotic origin.

PATHOGENESIS
Medorrhinum affects:

(a) The brain and spinal cord, producing paralysis, trembling and tidgety feeling with loss of memory.

(b) Cardio-vascular and respiratory systems resulting in dyspnoea, pain and cough.

(c) Joints, manifesting as rheumatism or gout.

(d) Glands—Enlargements of glands all over the body.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Medorrhinum is ideally suited to the patients having constitutional effects of maltreated or suppressed gonorrhoea; with trembling all over; weak, fatigued and emaciated as a result of long continued chronic diseases, with a state of collapse.

Temperament: Weeping disposition, peevish and impatient.

Relation with heat and cold: Medorrhinum is a hot patient, easily affected by heat in general.

Miasm: Sycosis is in the background for most of the troubles.

Diathesis: Rheumatic and gouty diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Medorrhinum is to be thought of in all cases of constitutional effects of maltreated and/or suppressed gonorrhoea when the best selected       remedies fail to relieve or permanently improve.
 
2. Soreness all over the body especially glands with burning in hands and feet (Sulphur, Puls., Cham, and Lach.).

3. Trembling all over the body with intense nervousness and profound exhaustion (Gels., Arg. nit. and Merc. sol.).

4. A state of collapse persists in the Medorrhinum patient who wants to be fanned all the time (Carbo veg., Lachesis). Coldness all over still    does not like covering, throws them off (Camphor, Secale cor.), cold and bathed with perspiration (Ver. alb.).

. Sensation of tightness, constriction and soreness all over.

. Intense restlessness and fidgety feeling in legs and feet (Zinc).

. Inordinate craving for liquor, salt, sweet and acid.

. Backache is relieved by profuse urination (Lyco.).

. Dyspnoea relieved by lying on face and protruding tongue.

10. Menses : Profuse, very dark, clotted, stains and difficult to wash off (Mag. carb.). wonwiena a

11. Pain in the heart region from apex to base (from base to apex, Syphilinum; from base to clavicle or shoulder, Spigelia),

12. Burning of hands and feet, wants them uncovered and and fanned (Sulph. and Lach.).

13. In case of women, there may be chronic ovaritis, salpingit,, pelvic cellulitis fibroids,cysts or any other morbid growth otuterus and ovar es     both benign and malignant with or without sycotic origin.

14, There is general aggravation FROM SUNR.SE TO SUNSET, when thinking of ailments, heat, covering and sweat. Amelioration at seashore (rev. of     Natrum mur. and Syphilinum).

15. Mind : Following are the very characteristic and sinking mental symptoms of this great remedy.There is GREAT WEAKNESS OF MEMORY, The patient is much worried about his forgetfulness; cannot remember very familiar names, words or initials; forgets not only his friend’s name, also his own name. Cannot spell correctly even very common words. Always has WEEPING TENDENCY (Puls. and Lil. tig.). Cannot speak without weeping; unable to narrate the symptoms. Often the question is to be repeated asshe loses herself. But the Medorrhinum patient predicts future events very correctly. Feels matters most sensitively before they occur. Always anticipates, anticipates her own death. He/she is too much irritated at verysilly matters; also peevish and impatient. Anxious, sensitive, nervous and fastidious.Time passes very slowly (Alumina, Arg. nit and Cannabis Ind.). Wants to do everything in a hurry and then gets exhausted and fatigued. Dreams of drinking and of insatiable thirst. Many of the mental symptoms are aggravated whern thinking about them.

16. Ailments from : Cases of maltreated and/or suppressed gonorrhoea may be treated with Medorrhitium giving immense relief to the patients, when the best selected remedies give no relief or fail to permanently improve, but only palliate, such ailments are as follows :-

(a) Disease of spinal cord and its meninges, with or without organic lesions, ending in paralysis and/or trembling, neuralgia, rheumatism, gout,     etc., which can be traced to a sycotic origin.

(b) Scirrhus, carcinoma or cancer, either, acute or chronic in development, when the symptoms point to a history of sycosis.

(c) In cases of women, chronic ovarits, salpingitis, growth of uterus and ovaries, both benign and malignant, with or without sycotic origin.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Sensation: Head feels very heavy and is drawn backward, Sensation of tightness and constriction, extending down the spine; weight and pressure on vertex.

Character of pain: There is intense burning pain in the brain which extends down the spine.

Modality: Headache aggravated from jarring of cars, exhaustion or hard work.

Castro-intestinal Symptoms :

Abdomen : Ravenous hunger immediately after eating (Cina, Lyco., Psorinum), with intense thirst; even she dreams she is drinking. There is INTENSE CRAVING FOR LIQUOR which before she hated; desire for salt, sweet, ice, acids oranges, green fruits, etc.

Stool : There is constriction and inertia of bowels with ball-like stool. Can pass stool only by leaning far backwards (Can void urine only while sitting bent backwards, Zincummet.). There is sharp

needle-like pain in rectum so as to cause crying and tears. There may also be sensation of prolapse of rectum.

Character of stool is tenacious, clay-like, sluggish with oozing of foetid moisture. Intense itching of anus.

Back : There is severe backache extending from occiput to the whole length of spine, which is very sore and sensitive to touch. Beside this, there may also be burning heat along the course of the spine, beginning in nape of neck and extending downwards with stiffness and constriction. Lumber vertebrae are very sensitive and painful to touch. There is pain in sacrum, coccyx and back of hip running around and down the limb. Severe pain in back relieved by profuse urination (Lyco). Pains are aggravated when thinking of them and by heat.

Respiratory symptoms :

Throat : In any kind of throat affection, requiring this remedy there is sensation as if cold had settled in throat with distressing pain and soreness. Throat is filled with thick, gray blood stained mucus. The patient cannot swallow either liquid or solid.

Aggravation: From heat and when thinking of his ailments.
Cough : Pneumonia :
¢ Location: Usually middle lobe of right lung is affected.
© Sensation: Constriction in throat.
© Character of cough: Cough is dry, continuous, deep, hollow, like coughing in a barrel (Lyco).

© Character of sputa: Difficult to raise sputa. If at all raised, it is small, frothy, green in bitter balls and viscid.

Asthma :
© Causation: Maltreated or suppressed gonorrhoea.

* Character: There is great dyspnoea, suffocation and chocking, caused by spasm and weakness of epiglottis. Larynx is completely stopped so that no air can enter. Can inspire well, but cannot expire (Sambucus).

Modialities:
¢ Amelioration; By lying on face, protruding the tongue, lying on abdomen and at seashore.
© Aggravation: When thinking of his ailments

* Concomitants: The surface of the body becomes cold and clammy, yet the patient does not like to cover the body and wants to be fanned rapidly.

Female genital organs :

Menses : In metrorrhagia or menorrhagia, this remedy Is to be thought of when following symptoms are present:—

Time: During climacteric period.

Quantity: Profuse




Duration: Long lasting.

Character of blood: Very dark and clotted, offensive, stains the cloth and difficult to wash off (Mag. carb.).

Concomitants: Breast and nipple are very painful, sensitive and sore to touch. Breasts espciaally the Nipples are icy cold to touch during menses while rest of the body is warm.

Urinary system : In renal colic, there is intense pain in ureter with sensation of passing renal stone (Lyco., Berb. Vul. and Sars). When urinating, there is painful tenesmus in bladder.

Character of urine: Urine is high coloured with smell of ammonia.

Nocturnal enuresis in children with history of gonorrhoea in parents. Passes large quantity of urine every night. Aggravation from over work, extremes of heat and cold. When the best selected remedies fail to relieve.

Extremities : There is INTENSE BURNING IN FEET AND HANDS, Wants them uncovered and” fanned (Lachesis, Puls., Chamomilla and sulphur).

Intense restlessness and fidgety feeling in legs and feet (Zincum). Pain in legs from hip to knees, only when walking; aches during night, preventing steep. During and electrical thunderstorm, there is terrible burning and aching in legs and arms,

Rheumatism :

In gout and rheumatism, caused by maltreated or suppressed gonorrhoea, this great remedy can be thought of.

Rheumatism and arthritic pain as a sequelae of suppressed gonorrhoea with sensation of constriction and tightening feeling all over the body. Sore as if bruised.

Location: Rheumatism of both the shoulders and arms (Right, Sanguinaria. Left, Ferrum met.). Pains extend; to fingers. Painful stiffness of every joint in body. Along with this, mere is deformity of finger joints, ankles are large and puffy, swelling and painful stiffness of ankles. Great tenderness of heels and balls of feet. Swelling and puffiness of all joints.

Modalities:

Aggravation: During days before a thunderstorm and when thinking of pain.

Amelioration: At sea-shore and during damp weather.

Baby :

Baby having sycotic background. Dwarfish baby with stunted growth (Psoric baby—Baryta carb.). Mentally the baby is very idiotic but physically weak. Pale rachitic with enlarged-lymphatic glands all over the body.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Most of the ailments are worse when thinking of them, from sunrise to sunset, heat, thunderstorm, covering, stretching, least movement and sweat.

Amelioration: At seashore (rev. of Nat. mur.), lying on stomach and damp weather (Caust., Nux vom., Hepar).

Relations :

Antidoted by: Ipecac.

Compatible: Sulphur.





CHAPTER:138  MELILOTUS ALBA

Sweet Clover BOWEN Leguminosae

INTRODUCTION

Melilotus was first proved by Bowen in 1851. A second proving was made by him fifteen years later. It has been re-proved by Dr. H.C.Allen.

CLINICAL

Congestion, constipation, convulsions, eclampsia, epilepsy, epistaxis, haemorrhages, headache, melancholia.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Congestions, relieved by haemorrhage.

2) Headache : Violent congestive or nervous headaches.

Location : Frontal Headache intense in left supra orbital region.

Sensation : Sensation of tension and wave like movement in brain with vertigo and nausea.
Character : Violent, congestive, periodical, nervous headaches, every week or every four weeks. Modality—Aggravation—By motion, by thinking. Amelioration—By lying down, by profuse urination, by epistaxis, by menstruation. Concomitant— Retching, vomiting, cold hands and feet.

3) Epistaxis preceded by intense redness, flushing of face and throbbing of carotids with general relief.

4) Very red face precedes haemorrhage from every organ.

5) Constipation : Stool is difficult, painful with feeling con-striction, fullness and throbbing in anus. No desire until there is large    accumulation.

6) Convulsions of nervous children during dentition. It is also a medicine for infantile spasms, eclampsia & epilepsy.

7) Mind : Inability to fix mind, to study; memory will not retain any thing. Wants to run away and hide. Delusion; thinks every one is looking at     her. Religious melancholy with intensely red face.

8) General Modalities : Aggravation—rainy changeable weather, approach storm, motion, 4 p.m.






CHAPTER :139 MENYANTHES TRI FOLIATA

Buckbean HAHNEYMANN Gentianaceae



INTRODUCTION

In common language it is called as ‘Buck- bean’ or Bog—Bean ‘as it grows in boggy places. It is a water plant and abounds in few districts, where it is in great local repute, as a remedy for ague. It was introduced into homoeopathy by Hahnemann, who proved it on himself.

CLINICAL

Headache. Heart pains. Intermittent fever. Gastric affections. Nerve—disorders.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Headache: The headache found under this remedy is very characteristic.

Location : There is pressing pain in vertex from above down wards.

Sensation : Sensation as of a heavy weight pressing upon head at every step. (Cac., Glon., Lach.).

Modalities : Aggravation : Ascending (Calc.)

Amelioration—During hard pressure with hands, stooping, sitting.

Concomitant: Headache is often associated with icy coldness of hands and feet (Cal. Sep.).

2) Gastric Symptoms :

Gi) Thirst: No thirst at any time,

Gi) Has desire for meat,

(iii) Ravenous hunger passing away after eating a little,

(iv) Sensation of coldness in stomach and abdomen,

(v) Distention of abdomen increased by smoking tobacco.

3) Extremities : Iey coldness of hands and feet. As soon as patient lies down, legs jerk & twitch.

4) Anxiety : about the heart as if some evil was impending.

5) Tension : in root of nose; in arms, hands, fingers; in skin as if of several sizes, too small and was crowded into it by force,

6) Ailments from : Complaints from abuse of cinchona and quinine.

7) Intermittent Fever : Causation : Cases abused by cinchona & quinine.

Chill stage—This stage predominates in Menyanthes. Col-dness felt most acutely in abdomen & legs. It is felt most severely on the back, and it is greatly relieved by warmth of the stove or near fire. As soon as he rises from his bed in the morning he feels coldness creeping over abdomen, back and sides. Icy coldness of hands and feet as if immersed in ice water. There is shivering with yawning.

Heat stage : There are flushes of heat with hot ears and cheeks.

Sweat stage : Perspiration in evening as soon as he lies down—Continuing all night.

Menyanthes can be compared with Apis Mel, Cedron, China, Chin Ars, Eup. Perf. Ignatia, Lycopodium, Nat Mur. Ver. Alb. in intermittent fever.

Apis Mel : Chill begins at 3-00 p.m. with thirst. Pulse is full and rapid, small and trembling intermittently. No thirst in sweat stage. Worse from warm and heated room and exter-nal heat.

Cedorn : It is a valuable remedy in intermittent fever espe-cially when there is a clock wise recurrence in succesive attacks of fever & chill. Before Chill, there is a great mental excitement & exaltation of vital energy. General coldness renewed by every movement. During heat stage red face & thirst for warm drink is marked. It is soon followed by a state of profuse perspiration.

China : In China all the three stages of fever, chill, heat & sweat are very well marked. Paroxysm anticipated from two to three hours before each attack. It returns every seven or fourteen days, but never at night. There is a profuse debilitating sweat all over on being covered or during sleep.

Chin. Ars. : Intermittent fever with great prostration and periodicity. Chill stage prodominates with little thirst and continuous convulsive yawning. Eup. Perf : In Eup. Perf. the time of paroxysma is generally between 7 A.M. and 9 AM. It is postponing type. There is great thirst for several hours before the fever. He knows chill is coming because he cannot drink enough. Drinking hastens chill and causes vomiting at close of Chill. The bruised feeling, as if broken all over the body, bony pain affecting back, chest, limbs especially the wrists which feel as if dislocated. The more general and severe the pain, the better it is indi-cated and
adapted.

Ignatia : Fever paroxysm comes with marked periodicity. Fever comes at the same hour everyday. In fever the face is red during chill, pale during heat, also there is great thirst during chill stage of fever and no thirst in heat stage. There is great yawning and stretching before the attack of fever. The suffering of the patient is aggravated by covering and relieved by exiernal heat.

Lycopdium : Chill between 3 & 4 p.m. The patient feels as if lying on ice. One chill is followed by another. There is sour vomiting between chill & heat stage.

Natrum Mur : It is especially to be though of in chronic, intermittet fever and old badly treated cases especially after suppression by quinine. Fever paroxysm between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m. Fever with sever headache, left sided clavus as if a thousand little hammers were knocking in the brain with coldness of the body and chilliness well marked. Uncon-sciousness during chill and heat. There is sweat on every little exertion with relief of all the sufferings.

Veratrum Album : In this remedy we get a very congestive and pernicious type of intermittent fever with extreme cold-ness of the body, great thirst, face cold and collapsed, skin cold and clammy, great prostration, cold sweat on forehead and deathly pallor on face.

 
chapter: 140 MERCURIUS CORROSIVUS

Corrosive Sublimate BUCHNER HgCl,

INTRODUCTION

Merc. cor. is a very small drug, but its action is very remarkable in a few diseases. The key- note which runs through the whole drug is
GREAT TENESMUS, either in the rectum or urinary bladder, or in both. It was proved by our Master Hahnemann with the help of physio-chemical process, by mixing one part of mercury and two parts of chlorine.

Mercurius corrosivus very much resembles Mercurius in many of its pathogenesis, but the
depth of action, severity of the case, excoriation and burning, rapid spreading of ulcer and tenesmus are much more in Merc. cor.

CLINICAL

Apthae, Bone affection, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Eczema, Gonorrhoea, Kidney affection, Labour, Mumps, Puerperal fever, Paralysis, Syphilis, Tenesumus, Throat affections, Tongue affections, Ulcerated intestine, Urinary troubles, Uvula elongated, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on mucous membrane, intestine, urinary bladder, eye, bones etc. It also has got action over the serous membranes, especially peritoneum.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes irritation and inflammation of both mucous and serous memmbranes producing tenesmus of rectum and bladder, suppression of urine.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Great tenesmus persists before, during and even after stool. Tenesmus not relieved by stool; stool scanty mucus mixed with stool.

2. Tenesmus of the bladder and rectum at the same time; urine passes in drops with much pain. Throat intensely inflamed, swollen, burning with swollen gums, which bleed easily. Ulcers are deep and spread very rapidly.  Desire for cayenne pepper, ice, cold water. Aliments from : Syphilis, sun and summer weather.


PARTICULARS

Eyes :

Opthalmia neonatorum. Burning, excoriating discharge from the eyes, soreness of the eyes. Eyelids swollen. Deep ulcers on the cornea.

Mouth :

Teeth loose. Gums spongy and swollen. Pyorrhoea and ptyalism. Tongue swollen and inflamed. Salivation is profuse. Salty and bitter taste in 
mouth.

Throat :

UVULA SWOLLEN; SWALLOWING IS VERY PAINFUL RAPIDLY SPREADING ULCERS, BURNING PAIN WITH GREAT SWELLING. All glands about the throat are swollen.

Modality: Worse by external pressure.

Dysentery :

Merc. cor. is FAMOUS for dysentery in violent cases.

Causation: Mostly during summer weather.

Stool: COPIOUS, BLEEDING, SUMY; contains streaks of mucus membrane; very offensive;
frequent evacuation.

Before stool: Tenesmus, cutting colic and uriging to stool.

During stool: Tenesmus of the rectum and may be accompanied with tenesmus of bladder too.

After stool: No relief. Tenesmus persists for some time. Great burning in the rectum.

Modality: More at night and aggravated by motion.

Concomitants: Unquenchable thirst. Salivated, swollen tongue. Abdomen swollen, hard and sensitive to pressure, especially about the umbticus. Scanty urine, passes drop by drop; hot, bloody, tenesmus in the bladder. Faintness, weakness and shuddering. Cramps in the calf muscles.

Urine :

Tenesmus of bladder with intense burning in urethra. Urine is hot, buming, scanty or suppressed. Voided drop by drop, with great pain; bloody. Intense burning in urethra. Stabbing pain extends up urethra info bladder.

Concomitants: Perspiration after urinating. Albuminuria in early preganancy (Phosphorus, later and at full term).
Gonorrhoea :

In the second stage of gonorrhoea when the greenish discharge begins to flow and the burning and tenesmus continues, Merc. cor, is of great help.

Modality: Aggravation at night.

Concomitants; Penis and testes are enormously swollen. Chancres assume phagadenic appearance.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Afternoon, AT NIGHT AND DURING SUMMER.

Amelioration: By rest.



chapter: 141  MERCURIUS CYANATUS

Mercuric Cyanide Hg(CN),

INTRODUCTION

Of this form of Mercury no regular proving has been made; the symptoms are toxicological and clin-ical. This medicine is needed in serious condition of throat.

CLINICAL

Diphtheria, Throat sore etc.

1) Malignant diphtheria. with intense redness of fauces and great difficulty of swallowing.

2) Formation of pseudomembrane extending all over the fauces and down the throat.

3) Putrid gangrenous diphtheria with phagedenic ulceration, membranous croup.

4) Great weakness, extreme prostration, patient cannot stand up from weakness.

5) Profuse salivation and discharge of green exudations from nasal cavities and from the fauces, pharynx and larynx.

6) When it corresponds to the genus epidemicus, like every other remedy, is effective as a prophylactic.



MERCURIUS DULCIS:

Calomel HgCl

CLINICAL

Condylomata. Deafness. Diarrhoea. Eustachian tube-affections of. Otorrhoea. Otitis media. Prostitis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Especially suited to scrofulous children who are liable to bilious attacks and whose complexions are charac-terised by a peculiar corpse like pallor:

2) Catarrhal affections of mucous membranes especially of the eyes and ears.

8) Catarrhal inflammation of middle ear, eustachion tube closed, catarrhal deafness and otorrhoea in psoric children.

4) Black tongue, sore gums, constant and putrid saliva and ulcerations in mouth are characteristics of Merc. Dulcis.

5) Acute affection of prostate after maltreated stricture.

6) Condylomatous growth around external genitals, perineum and anus of the females emitting an extremely offensive smell.

7) Diarrhoea of children, profuse grass green stool like chop-ped eggs causing soreness of anus.

chapter : 142  MERCURIUS

(HYDRARGYRUM) so Quick Silver HAHNEMANN The Element Hg

INTRODUCTION

Mercurius is the KING OF ANTI- SYPHILITIC remedies, prepared and proved by Hahnemann. It is prepared by precipitating Mercury from its solution in Nitric acid by means of Caustic ammonia. The Pathogenesis of Mercury is found in the provings of Merc, viv.,  and Merc. sol. “Iwo different preparations, but not different enough to make any distinctions in practice” remarks DR KENT. Even CLARKE supports this fact in his Dictionary by saying, “No pains have been taken to keep distinct Merc, sol and Merc, viv., and I do not find it practicable to attempt to separate them”. One more thing to clarify is that the pure element, Mercurius, manifested the same symptoms as soluble mercury—Merc. sol. Hence there is no point in separately discussing them.

CLINICAL

Abscess, Anaemia, Bone affection, Breath offensive, Bronchitis, Catarrh, Cold, Dentition, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Dyspepsia, Eye affection, Gout, Glandular swelling, Gum troubles, Heart affection, Jaundice, Leucorrhoea, Liver affection, Lung affection, Measles, Melancholia, Perspiration abnormal, Pregnancy troubles, Prostatic disorders, Rheumatism, Small-pox, Suppuration, Syphilis, Teeth affection, Throat and Lung affections, Toothache, Tremors, Ulcers, Vomiting, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Every organ and tissue of the body is more or less affected by this powerful drug—

such as bones, glands, lymphatic system, internal organs, intestine, mucous membrane, ete.

PATHOGENESIS

Lesions produced by Mercury are very similar to those of syphilis. It decomposes blood, producing profound anaemia. It has great power over suppuration with sero- Sanguinous discharge, slimy in character. It also produces ulceration of mouth and throat, much salivation, with falling of hair. It causes inflammation which leads to induration and from induration to ulceration.


CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: It is best adapted to light-haried persons with lax skin and lax muscles. In some cases, jaundice or yellow coloration of skin in marked.

Temperament: Easily frightened nature with hurried and rapid speech.

Relation with heat and cold: Mercurius is said to be the HUMAN BAROMETER, Easily affected by both extremes of heat and cold (Antim.crud.—least affected, Fi.ac.).

Miasm: Syphilis. It is the KING OF ANTI-SYPHILITIC remedies.


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1, All complaints arc aggravated from sunset to sunrise i.e. whole night, especially the bone pains, the characteristic symptom of all syphilitic medicines.

2. Profuse offensive perspiration with nearly every complaint, which gives no relief; on the contrary it increases the suffering (Ver.alb. Hepar sulph.—profuse prespiration        
   gives     relief—Natrum mur, Psonnum). yoorinan

3. All discharges are very offensive, especially sweat and breath. The patient as a whole smells offensive. Foulness and offensiveness run through the whole remedy.

4. Tremor and trembling from least exertion, especially in nervous disorders, such a as paralysis agitans.

5. Creeping chilliness with fever is a peculiarity of this drug.

6. Discharges from mucous membrane are slimy in character.

7. Thirst : There is intense thirst for large quantity of cold water, although the tongue is moist, salivated, large, flabby, showing imprint of    teeth (Chelidonium, Podo,  
   Rhus      tox) Dry tongue no thirst—Puls., Nux mos. Dry tongue much thirst—Bryonia, Arsenic).

8. Every little injury suppurates (Hepar, Silicea, Graphites). Glandular swelling with or without suppuration, especially if the suppurative    discharges are too profuse and 
   offensive.

9. Desire: Milk, sweet, but these disagree: beer; alcohol. Aversion to meat, coffnd butter.

10. Mind : Tired of life, weak memory, loss of will power. Slow and sluggish in answering questions for fear of losing his reason. Great     apprehension. Desire to flee with    
    nightly anxiety. Bad effects of fright, mania. Throws off the clothes at night and scolds, But does not     harm any one. Disgust for life.

11. Ailments from : Abuse of crude mercurial preparations; bad effects of sugar, stings of insects, fright, suppressed foot-sweat, vapour of     arsenic or copper. Suppress 
    gonorrhoea and/or syphilis.

12. In liver and lung complaints there is utter inability to lie on right side and there i$ aggravation by lying on right side.

13. The symptoms are worse by touch and pressure.

14, In the suppurative stage of small pox it is a specific remedy.

15. Flow of pus, particularly bloody pus from any orifice calls for Mercurius.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : Bitter taste, sweetish, putrid or slimy or metallic, coppery, soapy, stringy, tenacious mucus WITH INTENSE THIRST AND FOUL BREATH; profuse offensive saliva.

Tongue : Tongue is SWOLLEN, FLABBY; TAKES IMPRINT OF TEETH. Coated brown, black or thickly coated, dirty, yellow in case of jaundice. May have painful ulcers.

Teeth : Toothache, pulsating, tearing, lacerating, shooting to the face or ears. Aggravated in damp weather of evening from warmth of bed, from extremes of both heat and cold, but relieved by rubbing the cheeks. “Teeth erorn decoys Rint deem CHezerinn)

Gums : Gums are swollen, painful, sore, ulcerated, gangrenous, with bleeding on least touch.

Thirst : Although tongue is moist and salivated there is INTENSE THIRST.

Dysentery :

Causation: Fright and suppressed sweat.

Character of stool: Slimy, bloody, very offensive stool excoriating the anus. MORE THE BLOOD THE BETTER IS MERC SOL., INDICATED. Cannot finish sensation; tenesmus_not relieved
after stool. (Temporary relief after stool, Nux vomica). can

Modality: Aggravated at NIGHT.

Concomitants: Colic and fainting with creeping chilliness and thirst. Great tenesmus during and after Colic.

(Maximum tenesmus is in Merc., cor., even for passing urine).

Respiratory System :

Nose : Nasal catarrh, with much sneezing, of fluent acrid corrosive discharge, with raw and ulcerated nostrils. Yellow green, foetid puslike discharge. Shining bloody discharge from nostrils. Nasal bone swollen, sore and painful.

Modality: Aggravated at night and FROM DAMP WEATHER,

Throat : Best indicated in tonsillitis and quinsy, diphtheria, laryngitis or pharyngitis, when there is Constant desire to swallow. Uvula swollen and elongated, bluish, red swelling with burning and putrid discharge with PROFUSE, OFFENSIVE SALIVA. Tongue large, flabby with imprint of teeth. Fever with Creeping chilliness, profuse offensive perspiration without any relief. All symptoms are worse at night

Pneumonia stage: Late in the hepatisation and resolution stages.

Location: When the lower lobe of right lung \s affected (Bryonla, Chelidonium, Kali carb., Lyco.).

Character of cough: Dry, fatiguing cough, usually coming in two paroxysms. (In 3 paroxysms— Stannum met., Cup. met.) with stitching pain which extends to the back. Cough with yellow muco- Purulent expectoration which may be mixed with blood, putrid or salty in taste; offensive breath.

Modality: Cough AGGRAVATED AT NIGHT AND FROM WARMTH OF BED WHEN LYING ON

RIGHT SIDE; in damp wet weather. There is utter inability to lie on the right side (Bry., Natrum. mur., Phos., Sulph.).


416 Text Book of MATERIA-MEDICA

Concomitants: Fever with chilliness; offensive non-relieving sweat; moist; salivated, flabby tongue with intense thrist.

Urinary Symptoms :

Quantity of urine voided, is larger than the amount of fluid drunk. Frequent urging to urinate even every ten minutes, especially at night, but only a little quantity passes out at a time. Urine is offensive. Burning in urethra during and after micturition.

Leucorrhoea :

Greenish, biting, acrid, foetid leucorrhoea with much scratching. Especially at night, violent burning after scratching, with rawness in the area.

Modalities: Aggravated from contact of urine and relieved by washing with cold water.

Breast :

Mammae are very painful as if they would ulcerate at every menstrual period (Conium.Lac.can). Milk in breast instead of menses.
Skin :

Every little injury suppurates (Silicea, Hepar, Graph). Profuse, offensive, non-relieving sweat. Constantly moist skin. Persistent dryness of skin Centra-indicates Mercurius. IN BQILS AND ABSCESSES, when suppuration has set ih with intense pain at night, not relieved by either heat or cold, with fever and chilliness and non-relieved offensive sweat with intense thirst. Mercurius is to be thought of.

Itch is worse from warmth of bed: Vescicular or pustular eruptions, with yellowish brownish crust and offensive dischrge.

N.B. If given in low potency, it hastens suppuration (Hepar sulph.), whereas it aborts suppuration in high potency. Mercurius should not be given before and after Silicea.Cold abscesses when slow to suppurate with other characteristics, call for this great remedy (Calc. carb).

Ulcers :

Irregular in shape with undefined edges. The margins are everted like raw meat and the base is covered with caseous coat, having a dirty unhealthy look. Large ulcers bleed easily when touched and there is pain affecting the whole body.

There is tendency for the ulcers to run together, Rapidly decomposing ulcers on the legs. Pains are worse at night.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: At night, damp wet weather lying on right side, perspiring, warm roorn, and warm bed.

Amelioration: Rest, coitus, weeping.

Relations :

It antidoted bad effects of sugar, stings of Insects.

It is antodoted by Aurum, Hepar Sulph., Nitric acid.

Incompatible: Silicea.

It follows well: Belladonna in inflammatory condition. ’

chapter :143

Daphne Mezereum E. STAPF Thymelaceae

INTRODUCTION

It was introduced in the Materia medica by Dr. Stapf, but extensively proved by Hahnemann. “The medicine still remains as one of Hahnemann’s precious medical legacies”, remarks Dr. Tyler in her drug picture. Hughes tells us that mezereum was one of the vegetable substances with which it was attempted to replace mercury in the tretment of syphilis. This fact has been supported by provings. Hence, the drug is also called VEGETABLE MERCURY.

CLINICAL

Bone affection, Ear troubles,  Exostosis, Enlargement of glands, Gonorrhoea, Herpes zoster, Impetigo, Irritation, Leucorrhoea, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Syphilis, Teeth affection,
Tongue affection, Skin troubles, Ulcers, Vaccination-bad effects of, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on skin, bones, teeth, nerve and mind.

PATHOGENESIS

On the skin it produces variety of destructive changes, right from a simple non- eruptive itch to malignant ulcers, lesions with or without oozing and black discharges dry
up and become thick leather-like scab with a soft pus-like material intervening between it and skin surface. On bones, especially the periosteum, it causes inflammations and
bone pains. Nerves, underthe action of this drug produce neuralgia predominantly about teeth and face.


CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: It is especially suited to light haired, irresolute persons.

Temperament: Phlegmatic temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora and syphilis are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Bad effects of vaccination (Antim. tart., Silicea, Thuja, Crotalus hor.) especially skin eruptions.


2. Its action is characterised throughout by VIOLENCE i.e., violent pains, violent itching, etc.

3. Patient is very much sensitive to cold air.

4. Pains of various kinds with chilliness.

5. Ulcers with THICK WHITISH YELLOW SCABS, under which thick yellow pus collects.

6. The head is particularly covered with THICK LEATHER LIKE CRUSTS.

7. Facial neuralgia after zona (eruptive diseases); toothache when the pains are aggravated by eating.

8. In Mezereum, affections go from above downwards, from within outward and from right to left (Clarke).

9. Aggravation at night is a generality of Mezereum.

10. Mind : Mentally the patient is hypochondriacal, sad and despondent. He is indifferent to everything and everyone. Easily becomes angry at trifles and at perfectly harmless things or words, but is soon sorry for it. Weak memory with absent-mindedness and great aversion to talking. There is fear and apprehension and faintness, as if something would happen. The faintness is caused by shock, pain and by hearing bad news.

11. Ailments from : Anger, abuse of mercury, alcohol and vaccination.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation. After slight vexation and anger.

Location: Right sided, extending from root of the nose to the forehead.

Sensation: Feel as if the head would be crushed.

Character of headache. Violent type of headache. Pains are tearing and boring. Pain in head causes faintness.

Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: From slightest touch, motion and at night.

¢ Amelioration: In the open air, by heat and by covering the head.

Toothache :

In carious teeth, teeth decay suddenly, especially at the roats.

Character of toothache: Violent neuralgic pain; dull pain when biting on them and when touched by tongue. There is decaying about the root of the teeth. There is also scorbutic conditions of the gum which bleeds.

Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: At night and from touch.

¢ Amelioration: By keeping the mouth open and drawing the air in (rev. of Staph).


Mezereum 419

Sen eee

Skin :
Mezereum is an excellent remedy for skin affections, irrespective of whether it is:-
(a) Eczema and itching eruptions after vaccination, or
(b) Herpes Zoster, or
(c) Ulcers of various kinds.
Provided the following characteristic symptoms are found. Eczema and itching eruptions after vaccination, with intolerable itching followed by copious serous
exudations oozing out; aggravated in bed and from touch. The favourite site for many of the eruptions is the scalp. The head is covered with thick leather-like crust, under which thick and white pus collects here and there: hair is glued and matted together: pus after a time is ichorous beomes offensive and breeds vermin.

Ulcers with thick yellowish scabs in which thick yellow pus collects.

Vesicles appear around the ulcers which itch violently and burn like fire. The vesicles have fiery red areola around them.

Linen or charpie sticks to the ulcers. They bleed when it is torn away. Zona followed by neuralgic burning pain. A general unhealthiness of the skin is found all over the body. The skin gets wrinkled and in folds.

There is intense itching. Feels that thousands of small insects were creeping all over the body. Innumerable reddish elevations appear on the parts scratched.

Liver spots on chest and arms become dark and desquamated.

Modalities: 

* Aggravation: At night, in bed and from touch, from cold, damp and cold winds.
© Amelioration: In the open air..

Extremities :

Are affected by inflammatory rheumatism.

Causation: After abuse of mercury, after venereal diseases.

Location: Bones especially long bones are inflamed and swollen

Character of pain: There is severe bursting, tearing type of pain in periosteum. Pain goes from above downwards.

Pains are aggravated, at night, in bed, least touch, motion and in damp weather. Pains are better in Open air.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: At night, from cold, cold washing, touch or motion, bad effects of mercury.

Amelioration: In the open air.

Relations :

Compare: Causticum, Phytolacca, Rhus tox. Mezereum and Mercury antidote each other.

chapter : 144

MILLEFOLIUM Yarrow Compositae

INTRODUCTION

Another name for this plant is ‘Noseb-leed’, a very appropriate term because of its great tendency to produce haemorrhage, not only from the nose, but from every orifice and of the human system. Its medicinal proper-ties were known to the ancients. It is mentioned in Homer’s Iliad as being utilised by Achilles to heal the wounds of his soldiers and hence it is called Achillea millefolium.

CLINICAL

Cough, Convulsions, Epilepsy, Haemorrhages, Hysteria, Leucorrhoea, Vertigo.


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Haemorrhages : from all the orifices of the body ; from wounds or of mechanical origin ; painless haemorrhage without fever ; blood is bright red and fluid.

2) Profusely bleeding wound especially after a fall.

3) Vertigo when moving slowly, but not when taking violent exercise.

4) Cough: Causation : Suppressed menses or haemorrhoids, after a fall from a height, after violent exertion.

Character of cough : Cough with raising of blood daily at 4 p.m. (Lyco.)

Concomitant : Cough with oppression and palpitation.

5) Menses :

Time : Early

Quantity : Profuse a

Duration : Protracted Character : Suppressed with colic pain in abdomen. Blood is bright red & fluid.
6) Leucorrhoea of Children from atony (Cal., Caulo.)

7) Ailments from : Falls (from height). Overexertion. Lifting. Suppressed lochia. Suppressed menses. Suppressed haemorrhoids etc. In haemorrhage, Millefolium canbe.compared with Erige-ron, Ipceac, Nitric Acid, Phosphorus & Trillium.




Erigeron Canadensis : Haemorrhages of this remedy from the orifices of the body is characterised by bright redness of the discharge. Haemorrhage from the uterus, bloody lochia even leucorrhoea are usually attended with painful micturition or urinary irritation and in some cases with irritation of the rectum. It can be used with great success in cases of haematemesis due to ulceration or rupture of blood vessels in the stomach, from bowels due to fissures, from urinary bladder due to chronic cystitis, polyp or malignancy.

Ipecac : Ipecac is a great haemorrhagic remedy. Bleeding from all orifices of the body, from uterus, bowels, kidney, nose, lungs etc. Character of blood is profuse and steady flow of bright red blood. Nausea, oppressed breathing, thirstless-ness and clean tongue are the concomitant with haemorrhage.

Nitric Acid : Nitric Acid is an excellent remedy for haemorrhage from anywhere and every where. It may be from the mouth, nose, lungs, stomach, uterus after
miscar-riage or post partum, due to overexertion, chromic diseases, or broken down cachectic condition.

The character of blood is bright red or may also be dark, but profuse and coagulable with sticking, pricking, lancinat-ing and splinter like pain, relieved only by riding
in a carriage.

Phosphorus : It is a great anti-haemorrhagic remedy. Haemorrhage is caused by degeneration of tissue and occurs from small injuries or cut. In this, character of blood is pro-fuse, watery, bright red and non-coagulable. Bleeding from various organs and parts of the body. Small wounds bleed much, pours out freely and then ceases suddenly for a time, seen as in metrorrhagia, haemoptysis, haematemesis, from nose, stomach, anus etc.

Trillium Pendulum : Trillium also has profuse, bright red and active or passive haemorrhage from nose, lungs, kidneys and uterus etc. In uterine haemorrhage flow is gushing, pro-fuse, bright red, aggravated by least movement. At climacteric the flow occurs every two weeks ; paleness, faintness, dim-sight, palpitation, obstruction and noise in ears, and painful sinking at pit of stomach are concomitant symptoms.






chapter: 145 


MOSCHUS

Musk Deer HAHNEMANN Mammalia

INTRODUCTION

It is potentised from the musk which is the fatty, waxy and gelatinous substance with a very strong smell and is found in a sack between the umbilicus and the pre-putial orifice of the mask deer.

CLINICAL
Hysteria. Hystero-epilepsy.

CONSTITUTION

It is suited to nervous, sensitive and hysterical persons. Chilly patient; antipsoric medicine.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

It is one of the valuable hysterical remedies useful in cases of hystero-epilepsy, convulsion, globus hystericus etc. where the symptoms are—

G) Fainting : frequent tendency to fainting from least excitement, while eating, during menses,

Gi) Sensation of coldness and shivering,

Gii) Tension in muscles, in skin and mind is another keynote of Moschus.

(iv) Spasm of the larynx and spasm of the chest may be present.

(v) Great flatulence, craving for beer, stimulants and aversion to food.

PARTICULARS

Mind : Uncontrollable laughter. Scolding. Sexual hypo-chondriasis. Anxiety with palpitation ; starting as if frightened.

Stomach : Spasmodic, nervous hiccough (Ign., Sulph. ac.) Anxiety in chest with gastric symptoms. Distension of abdomen, Faints when eating. Desire for black coffee, Stimulants. Aversion to food.
Sexual symptoms :


Male : Sexual hypochondriasis, Violent desire ; irivolun-tory emissions. Impotence, associated with diabetes. Premature senility. Nausea and vomiting after coition.

Female : Menses too early, too profuse with disposition to faint. Sexual desire, with intolerable titilation in parts. Drawing and pushing in the direction of the genitals ; Sensation as if menses appear,


Respiratory symptoms :

Hysterical spasm of chest, difficult respiration, chest oppressed. Tightness of chest, is obliged to take a deeper breath. Sudden constriction of larynx and trachea. Asthma with intense anxiety, fear and smothering sensation. Globus hystericus. Cough ceases, mucus cannot be expectorated.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : Cold.

Amelioration : Open air, rubbing.

Relations :

Campare : Nux Mos., Asaf., Valer., Sumbul, Ign, Castor.

Campatible: Ambra.

Antidotes : Camph ; Coff.



 chapter : 146
 
MUREX PURPUREA


Purple fish PETROZ Muricidae


INTRODUCTION

Murex purpurea is prepared from a sea snail found on the coast of mediterranean sea called the purple fish. Like Sepia, this purple fish, secretes a peculiar substance which is of a fine red particularly A WOMAN’S REMEDY. It was first proved by Petroz, unto whom we owe this remedy.

CLINICAL

Abortion, Climacteric suffering, Diabetes, hue. Just like Sapia, this remedy is

Leucorrhoea, Menstrual disorders, Nymphomania,
Pregnancy troubles, Prolapse of Uterus, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Murex acts especially upon the female genital organs—uterus, ovaries and other
genital organs.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up: Best adapted to lively affectionate women.

Temperament: Melancholic temperament.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS


. There is sore PAIN IN THE UTERUS.
. Least Contact of parts cause violent sexual excitement.





This remedy is infallible for the sufferings during climacteric in women.

. Bearing down sensation, as if internal organs would be pushed out. Must sit down

and cross limbs to relieve pressure.

. Pain from right side of womb to right or left breast.

. Leucorrhoea alternates with mental symptoms.

. Sinking, all gone sensation in stomach.

. Violent excitement in sexual organs and excessive desire for an embrace.

. Great depression of spirit with sadness.

. Ailments from : Climacteric age (Medo., Lachesis, Sepia, Calc. carb, Glonoine,

Sanguinaria).


Murex Purpurea 425
a
PARTICULARS

Menses :

Suited in dysmenorrhoea.

Time: Irregular.

Quantity: Too profuse.

Duration: Usually long.

Character: Protracted, large clots with violent bearing down pain in abdomen.

Concomitants: With extreme sensitiveness of external genital organs and violent sexual excitement.

Leucorrhoea :

Serous, greenish, thick, becoming sanguinous. There is reappearance of sanguinous leucorrhoea
while at stool.

Sensation: Sensation of pelvic bones getting loose.

Modality: Leucorrhoea relieves mental depression. Patient is happier when leucorrhoea is
worse.

Prolapse :

It is an admirable remedy for the prolapse of uterus, when the displacement is associated with SORE PAIN IN UTERUS; a distinct sensation of a womb. The pain extends upwards from the right side of uterus and after crossing the body it goes to the left mammae. There is bearing down sensation as if internal organs would be pushed-out. The patient must sit down and cross limbs to resist pressure. In this respect, Murex is very similar to Sepia. The differentiating features consist in its profuse and excessive haemorrhage, whereas in Sepia the flow is usually scanty. Furthermore, during the period of haemorrhage, she passes large clots. Both have got bearing down sensation as if the internal organs would be pushed out and she must sit and cross legs to resist the pressure. Along with prolapse, in Murex, there is INTENSE SEXUAL DESIRE, while in Sepia, there is COMPLETE LACK OF SEXUAL DESIRE OR RATHER aversion to it especially with prolapse. Sepia is also chilly, apathetic and indifferent.

Sexual symptoms :

There is violent excitement in sexual organs. She is afflicted with almost a frantic desire for sexual gratification, having excessive desire for an embrce. There is almost unbearable sexual desire.

Least contact of parts causes violent sexual excitement.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From least touch.

Relations :
Compare: Platina, Lilium, Sepia.




chapter :147
MURIATIC ACID

Hydrochloric Acid HAHNEMANN HCl

INTRODUCTION

It is an acid prepared by the action of concentrated Sulphuric acid on Sodium chloride. Like all acids, it produces the peculiar DEBILITY AND IRRITABILITY. It has 574
symptoms in Hahnemann’s Materia Medica Pura.

CLINICAL

Anus—prolapse of, Diphtheria, Diarrhoea, Enteric fever, Haemorrhoids, Hemiopia, Heart troubles, Mouth and Tongue affection, Typhoid, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its actions are centred on blood, gastro-intestinal tract, anus, urinary organs, mucous membrane and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

Muriatic acid irritates and corrodes the mucous membranes, leading to ulceration. It causes a low febrile condition and hence becomes useful in cases of typhoid. Like Nitric acid, Muriatic acid is a powerful antidote to Mercurius. Just like other disinfectants, it causes rapid decomposition of tissues and dynamically cures the putrid conditions met with in some severe diseases. It produces sour excretion and make them acrid.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: It is adapted to person with black hair, dark eyes and dark complexion.

Temperament: Irritable and peevish temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Diseases of asthenic type with intense prostration.
2. Patients become unconscious and fretful.

8. Great debility, slides down in bed: Even the LOWER JAW HANGS DOWN. His
eyes close as soon as he sits down.

4, Burning is a great feature of its symptomatology e.g., ulcers, vruptions,. piles, stomach and abdomen (Clarke).

5. Malignant affections of mouth. Mouth studded with ulcers which are deep perforating and having a black or dark base.

6. Offensive secretions and foul breath from mouth in fevers of all kinds e.g., exanthematous, typhoid, puerperal, diphtheritic, etc.

7. Patient cannot bear the thought or sight of meat (Nit. ac.).

8. Tongue of Muriatic acid is very characteristic. It is coated at edges; shrunken, dry, leather like and paralysed; beefy tongue.

9. The pulse of this drug, especially in typhoid, intermits at every third beat.

10. Palpitation of heart is felt in the face.

11. Anus is VERY SENSITIVE, with or without piles. Anus is sore during menses.

12. Piles protrude while the person urinates (Baryta carb.). Involuntary stool while passing urine.

18. Cannot bear the least touch not even of the bed sheet genitals..

14. Ailments from : Sun’s heat. .

PARTICULARS
Mouth :

Mouth is one of the chief seats of actions of this drug. There are malignant affection of mouth.

Mouth is studded with ulcers which are deep and perforating having a black or dark base. The breath is very offensive.

Tongue: It is coated at edges. It is famous as BEEFY TONGUE. Tongue is shrunken, dry, leather- like.

Diarrhoea :

There is diarrhoea while urinating, with involuntary stool. Can not urinate without having the bowels move at the same time. Involuntary stool even, when passing wind (Phosphorus, Aloe).

Haemorrhoids :

Anus is VERY SENSITIVE either with or without haemorrhoids. Haemorrhoids are very SENSITIVE AND PAINFUL TO TOUCH. It is swollen and blue. It may appear suddenly m children. It is too sore to bear the least touch, even the touch of the bed sheet is uncomfortable. Haemorrhoids prolapse while urinating (Baryta cart).

Urine :

Urine passes slowly. The bladder is weak, so he has to wait for a long time to pass urine (Natrum mur., Hepar sulph.). He has to press the aodomen so that the anus also pmtruds before urine can pass, Cannot urinate without having the bowels move at the same time. Cannot bear least touch, even of the bed sheet on genitals.


Typhoid :
Causation: Heat of summer and sun.

Symptoms: Debility and prostration are out of proportion to illness. So the patient SLIDES DOWN IN BED. THE LOWER JAW HANGS DOWN WITH GREAT DEBILITY.

Deep, stupid sleep; unconscious while awake, loud meaning and muttering. There is more chill than heat. The chill awakens him in the morning.

Chill with coldness in back and with warmth and burning in face.

Hands are cold and cheeks are hot.

There is intense heat. So the patient wants to uncover. Burning in palms and soles. Heat at night with palpitation of heart which is felt in the face.

Concomitants : Tongue coated at edges; shrunken, dry, and leather like. Tongue is paralysed; very offensive smell from mouth and in breath. Ulcerations with fungus like growth and pseudeo membranous deposits in the intestinal tract. Passage of involuntary foetid stool while passing urine, intermits at every third beat. Headache comes regularly everyday from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.


General Modalities :

Amelioration: By lying on left side and uncovering (during fever).

Aggravation: From touch and after sleep.

Relations :

Follows well: After Rhustox., Bryonia and Mercunus.

It antidotes: Opium.

Its antidotes are: All carbonates of sodium and potassium, Camphor and Bryonia.






chapter : 148


NAJA TRIPUDIANS




—=,,.”~—COt” ed DEG & GTOKES~—~*~*~*«~C:*é‘s*«‘e
Cobra Virus Proved by RUSSEL & STOKES Elapidae
ee

INTRODUCTION

It has been used in India since ancient time in many nervous and blood diseases. Kent says, “The use of Naja has extended far beyond its provings because many Homoeopaths presume that many of the ophidian fam-ily presents symptoms in common with it”. Cobra poison is also as deadly as Lachesis and Crotalus Horridus.

CLINICAL

Anginapectoris. Chronic hypertrophy and valuular diseases of heart, Cardiac asthma. Cholera. Dipth-eria. Endocarditis. Oesophagismus. etc.

SPHERE OF ACTION

Naja has got strong affinity for the heart. All its complaints have tendency to settle about the heart. Other than heart it also affects Nervous system, such as medulla oblongata, cerebellum, respiratory nerves, pneumogastric and glossopharyngeal nerves.

PATHOGENESIS

Like other ophidians it does not have action over the blood but unlike them it strongly affects nervous system and thereby produces bulbar paralysis and feeling of
intoxication, followed by loss of power over the lower limbs, aphasia, loss of control over swallowing and movement of lips, loss of sense of constriction, gradual loss of respiratory.

Power and its ultimate cessation.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) All complaints have tendency to settle around the heart.
2) Left side is principally affected and the symptoms have tendency to go from left to right.
3) All the complaints aggravate after sleep. Sleep profound like a log with stertorous breathing.
4) Profound exhaustion and trembling of the muscles.
5) Constriction of throat, chest etc.
6) Sensation of hot iron running throughout the system.
7) Copious sweating of hands & feet with a sense of puffing and fulness.
8) Very susceptible to cold. Body cold and collapsed. Inability to speak, choking,
nervous, chronic palpitation especially after public speaking.

Mind : Sudicidal insanity ; broods constantly over imagi-nary troubles (Aurum met.) Anxiety and fear of death. (Ars. alb.)
Depressed, Aversion to talking. Melancholy. Blurred speech. Dreads to be left alone. Fear of rain.

Heart:

For restoring a heart damaged by acute inflammation or from relief of sufferings of chronic hypertrophy and valvu-lar lesions. Simple hypertrophy of heart. Excited,
tremend-ous action of heart. Palpitation of heart from exertion or talking or walking. Severe stitching pain in the region of heart extending to nape of neck, left shoulder and
arm. Pulse irregular in force, but regular in rhythm. Sensation of oppres-sion in chest and heavy weight on it. Marked symptoms of low tension. Threatened paralysis of heart,
post diptheritic. Irritating, dry, sympathetic cough in the acute stage of rheumatic carditis or chronic organic lesions (Spongia). Pains aggrevated by carriage riding in open
air.

Relation :
Antidoted by Ammonia, Tabacum.

Compare : Lachesis, Crotalus, Spigelia, Spongia. etc.

chapter: 149
NATRUM PHOSPHORICUM
Sodium Phosphate E.A. FARRINGTON Na,HPO, 12H,O
AA 2 >. da

INTRODUCTION

This is one of the tissue salts introduced by Schussler. Symptomatology available are the combined feature of indications by Schussler, proving symptoms by Dr. E. A. Farrignton & by
others & the clinical observations by homoeopathic stalwarts in the field.

CLINICAL

Acidity, Diabetes. Dyspepsia. Gastralgia,
Leucorrhoea, Post Nasal Catarrh.
Rheumatism. Worms. Sterility.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Spheres of action of this remedy is mainly found in G.I. tract & also upon the bones,
gla-nds, lungs & abdominal organs.

This drug has got a special affinity for the complaints arising from excess of lactic
acid in the system hence acidity is the most important characteristic of Natrum phos &
is seen to taint practically every organ under this remedy.”

PARTICULARS

Mind : Anxious and apprehensive. Fears as if something would happen. Imagines on waking at
night, that pieces of furniture are persons ; that he hears footsteps in next room.

Eyes : Discharge of golden yellow, cremy matter from the eyes. Dilation of one pupil. Whites of
eyes dirty yellow. Burning lachrymation. Sparks before eyes.

Ears : One ear red, hot, frequently itchy accompanied by gastric derangements and acidity. Roaring
in ears,

Nose : Pricking of the nose, associated with acidity of the stomach and worms. Offensive odor.
Itching of nose. Nosopharyngeal catarrh, with thick yellow offensive mucus.

Gastrointestinal symptoms :

Mouth : Yellow, creamy coating at the back part of the roof of the mouth. Dysphagia — Thin,
Moist coating on the tongue. Blisters on tip of tongue. Canker sores of lip and cheeks.

431


432 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Teeth : Grinding of the teeth in children during sleep.

Throat : The moist, creamy or golden yellow coating found at the base of the tongue is also found on soft palate; tonsils and uvula. Dropping of thick yellow mucus worse at night. Inflammation of any part of throat with sensation of lump in throat.

Stomach : Acidity, sour risings due to excess of lactic acid. Sour eructations and taste, sour
vomiting. Flatulence with sour risings. Colic with symptoms of worms. Ailments resulting from too much

sugar.
Stool : Diarrhoea caused by excess of acidity, stools sour smelling, green jelly like masses of mucus.
Sudden urging-difficulty in retaining stool.

Male : Emissions without dreams with weakness inback and trembling in limbs. Desire withot
erection. Gonorrhoea.

Female : Menses : too early, pale thin watery. Leucorrhoea : Discharge cremy or honey coloured
or acid and watery. Morning sickness, with sour vomiting. Sterility with acid secretions from vagina.

Back and Extremitis :

Weariness ; aching in wrists and finger joints. Rheumatic arthritis. Synovial crepitation Rheumatism of knee joint. Sore hamstrings. Weak feeling in back & limbs. Pain in knees ; ankles and skins in hollow and ball of foot. Crampy pain in hands while writing.

Skin :

Yellow jaundiced skin. Smooth, red, shining, Erysipelas. Feet icycold in day time & burn at night.
Much itching at ankle joints with eczematous eruption. Swelling of lymphatic glands Eczma with symptoms of acidity, secretions creamy honey coloured.


General Modalities :

Aggravation : Thunderstorm, during menses, afternoon & evening.

chapter : 150
NATRUM CARBONICUM
Carbonate of sodium HAHNEMANN Na,CO3,10H,O

INTRODUCTION

The Sodium carbonate from which this drug is prepared was first introduced in the field of Homoeopathic therapeutics by Hahnemann. It is a typical salt of the Natrum group with great antipsoric property. In the old school, its use is confined to burns and eczema and as a douche for nasal or vaginal catarrh. It forms alkaline base of soap. When
these are used in excess, it almost b the superficial layer of the epidermis and leaves the skin dry and cracked The proving of this drug shows that Natrum carb. is truely a remedy for chapped hand and face, rough dry skin, eczema.

CLINICAL

Burns, Cough, Diarrhoea, Headache, Herpes, Rheumatism, Respiratory troubles, Sterility, Menstrual disorders, Sunstroke, Throat affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION
It has got very marked action over the skin and mucous membrane of the human body. It stimulates the cellular activities and increases oxidation and metabolism.


It irritates the skin and thereby the skin of the whole body becomes dry rough and cracked with severe itching. On mucous membrane, the effects are equally marked. The
whole of the alimentary canal from mouth to anus is in a state of irritation, bordering on inflammation with redness of the mucous-membrane of the mouth and faces with
rawness and soreness.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Suited to persons leucophlegmatic constitution. The patient has aversion to open air dislike of exercise, either mental or physical. Imbecility. Face
paleiwitn blue ring around the eyes.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient; but head is very much affected by the heat of sun.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
.
. Great debility caused by heat of summer and sun.
.Chronic effects of sunstroke.
.Exhaustion and debility from least effort either mental or physical.
. Complaints in general aggravate from music: music causes gret sadness and tendency to suicide (Natrum sulph, Sabina, Nitric acid, Sepia, Thuja, Aconite)
. Symptoms are worse during a thunderstorm (Petroleum, Psorinum, Sepia, Phosphorus, Rhododendron).
. Aversion to milk and diarrhoea from taking it.
. Discharge of mucus from vagina after an embrace.
. Nose is swollen and ulcerated with a thick yellow or green offensive discharge.
. Great indigestion which is aggravated by vegetable and starchy food.

. Mind : Mentally the patient is very much sad, depressed and melancholic. There is sadness and depression of spirit. Therein difficulty in comprehension, inability to
combine the ideas while writing or reading.

Inability to think or to perform any mental labour as it causes headache. Feels stupefied if he tries to exert himself.

There is intolerable melancholy and depression. Patient is wholly occupied with sad thoughts.

Music is unbearable. Causes a tendency to suicide, melancholy and weeping. Music causes great sadness which leads even to religious insanity. Complaints in general
are aggravated from music.

There is attack of anxiety and restlessness during a thunderstorm and by mental exertion.

Ailments from : Heat of summer, gaslight, storm, overstudy, cold drinks, when overheated, etc.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache is caused by HEAT OF SUMMER, CHRONIC EFFECTS OF SUN STROKE,

renewed with return of hot weather, from mental labour.

Location: Headache first felt in the occiput.
Sensation: Head feels too large as if it would burst.

Character of pain: There is tearing, shooting pain with .sensation of pressive fulness in head as if

forehead was going; to burst. Great tension in the occiput before menses. There is inability to think or
perform any mental labour. It causes headache.

Modality: Aggravation: from slightest mental labour, from sun or working under gas light;

SUMMER HEAT, during a thunderstorm.

Natrum Carbonicum 435

Concomitants: With headache, there is profound debility and exhaustion from least exertion either mental or physical.
Abdomen :
There is great flatulence and accumulation of gas in the abdomen. There is ravenous hunger with sensation of emptiness in the stomach.

There is strong aversion to milk, which if taken causes diarrhoea and indigestion with sudden call to stool. Stool escapes with force and noise. Stool watery, yellow and a pulp-like substance of orange colour appears in the discharge.

Respiratory Symptoms :

There is marked catarrh with much mucus in throat and posterior nares, constant hawking to clear the throat. Constant coryza with obstruction of nose. Catarrh extends to posterior nares and throat, hawking up too much thick mucus from throat.

Character of discharge: There is thick, yellow, green, offensive discharge from nose, often
ceasing after meal. Profuse discharge during : the day, stops at night.

Cough : There is dry cough with coldness inside of the breast. Cough becomes more when coming
into a warm room from out of doors (Bry).
Female genital organs :
Menses : Natrum carb. is a good medicine for menstrual troubles. and the symptoms are as follows:-
Time: Late.
Duration: Usually short.
Quantity: Scanty.

Character of blood: Like washings of meat

Concomitants: Menses with bearing down pain as if every thing would push out.

Modalities: Aggravation by sitting, and amelioration by moving about.

Sexual Symptoms : This remedy is very good FORSTERILITY i.e., a constitutional state in a woman, whereby she is unable to conceive. Relaxation of the sphincter vaginae, allowing the seminal fluid to come out as soon as ejaculated by the male and in this way causes sterility. This state may be due-to spasm of the sphincter vaginae.

There is discharge of mucus frorn the vagina after an. embrace.
General Modalities :

Aggravation: From music, IN THE SUN, excessive summer heat, MENTAL EXERTION and thunderstorm.

Amelioration: By moving about,
Relations :

Composite: Natrum carb. with Natrum Sulph. for yeast-like vomiting; Calc., Sepia.

Follows well: After Sepia in bearing down.

chapter : 151 NATRUM MURIATICUM

Common Salt HAHNEMANN NaCl

INTRODUCTION

Natrum mur. is one of Hahnemann’s topmost constitutional deep-acting remedies which ranks in the first order for its power. It is prepared from common salt which is a very common article of diet and it had been taken for granted that it  would be of no use as a medicine. But it possesses a wonderful bold on the human economy when it is served in a potentised form.

CLINICAL

Anaemia, Artophy, Catarrh, Constipation, Cough, Debility, Dyspepsia, Eye affection,  Glandular affections, Headache, Heart affection, Intermittentfeyer, Leucorrhoea, Marasmus,
Menstrual troubles, Respiratory troubles, Rickets, Sterility, Skin troubles, Tongue affections, Urinary affection, Vertigo, Warts, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on skin, alimentary tract, blood and lymphatic system, mind, liver, spleen,
genital organs, etc. wy) ale

PATHOGENESIS fab

Natrum, n Ahiur. enters into every tissue of the body and stimulates them. It causes deterioration of the blood in quantity as well as in quality, producing thereby anaemia,
Various ulcers and eruptions on skin, also destructive inflammation of the mucus and glandular tissues. It stimulates digestion and secretion of gastric juice and the glandular secretion as well. Its lack of assimilation causes marasmus in children. It also stimulates the sebaceous glands and as a result the skin becomes oily and greasy in appearance.
While the muscular tissue is strengthened by presence of salt, it maintains the tone of nerve. It has marked action on male genital organs causing great weakness and giving
rise to seminal emission during sleep.

CONSTITUTION
Make-up of the body: Emaciated people having shiny, oily and waxy look of the face, as if greased. Cachectic appearance having blue ring around the eyes.

Body: Emaciation is WELL MARKED IN NECK WITH LOSING OF FLESH WHILE LIVING WELL.

436


Natrum Muriaticum 437

Temperament: Nervous type of people who are very much akward and hasty and drop things from hand (Apis, Bovista).

Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient, yet there is great liability to take cold (Kent).

Miasm: It covers all the three miasms viz., Psora, Syphilis, and Sycosis.
Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
Great emaciation, losing flesh while living well. (Abrot., lod.).

Most of the symptoms are worse from sunrise to sunset, especially from 10 to 11 a.m., but are relieved by perspiration (Psorinum—rev. of Merc. sol., Ver. alb.).
. Left sided headache, especially of school girls, which is relieved by perspiration.
. Mapped tongue with red insular patches, like ring worms on sides (Ars.,Lach., Merc. sol., Nit. acid).
. Involuntary urination when walking, coughing, laughing (Causticum, Puls., Arg. nit.).
. Cannot pass urine in presence of others (Hepar, Mur. ac.)
. Consolation aggravates her troubles (Hell., Sepia, Lil tig rev of Pulsatilla).
. Intense crowns for salt, bitter things, fish and milk, aversion to bread, coffee, tobacco, Gad ridh things.
. Fluttering of the heart; the heart’s pulsation shakes the whole body.

Hairs fall out when touched, in nursing women.
Hangnails; skin; around the nails are dry and cracked.
Eczema especialy in edges of hair.

Mind : The mental condition is characterised by EXCESSIVE IRRITABILITY. They ery for slightest cause and get into a passion about trifles.

The Nat. mur. patient is greatly disturbed by excitement is extremely emotional.The whole nervous economy is in a state of fret and irritation.

Again there is a HYSTERICAL CONDITION of mind, weeping alternates with laughing, irresistible laughing at unsuitable times weeping, mood without any
cause but CONSOLATION AGGRAVATES THE STATE OF MIND.

The lachrymal disposition and hypochondriacal mood are the two striking features of this remedy. GOYH) ban

The patiet is very awkward and hasty, drops things from hand Dreams of robbers at night and on waking will not believe to the contrary until and
unless a thorough search is made of the house.
All the mental symptoms are due to the bad effects of anger, grief, vexation, excessive use of salt, bread, quinine, fright, loss of vital fluids, sexual excess,
profuse menses, etc. Mentally Nat.mur. is the chronic of Ignatia.



Ailments from : Bad effects of anger, grief, vexation, excessiue use salt, bread,
quinine, fright, loss of vitgl fluid, sexual excess profuse menses, etc.
disappoirted fove
PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation: Exposure to sun, eye-strain, taking too much salt and loss of vital fluid.
Location: Left sided clavus.
Sensation: As if a thousand little hammers are knocking on the brain.

Character of pain: Bursting type of headache, which is chronic in nature. Headache starts with blindness, zig zag vision (Gels., Kali bich.). Such type of headache is usually found in school going girls, who are emaciated, anaemic and chlorotic.

Modalities:
* Aggravation from heat of sun, sunrise to sunset, especially from 10 to 11 a.m.
* Amelioration: Relieved by perspiration (Psorinum, zincum) and open air.
Concomitants: Blindness before headache, patient having an anaemic and chlorotic look, mapped tongue and great craving for salt.

Respiratory Organs :
Nose, violent and fluent coryza, with breathing difficulty, stoppage of nose. Discharge is thin and watery, like the white of an egg; violent sneezing, loss of smell and taste.

Cough : Natrum mur. is especially indicated in marked coryza and cough.
© Sensation: Sticking sensation in throat.
© Character of sputa: Sputa is thick, whitish, watery, like the white of an egg.
* Modality: Aggravation: More in the morning and on the seashore.

¢ Concomitants; Inability to swallow. Whenever he coughs, tears stream down the face
(Euphrasia). MAPPED TONGUE with red insular patches. Loss of taste in mouth,

Heart : Fluttering sensation of the heart. Weak faint feeling. The heart’s pulsation shakes the whole body.

Modalities:
¢ Aggravation from lying down and at the seashore.
© Amelioration by lying on right side (Sulph).

Urinary Symptoms :

Slow action of the bladder. Urine comes slowly, dribble out. Lack of force in the flow of urine.
Involuntary urination especially when walking, coughing, laughing (Causticum, Puls, Mur. acid).

Patient cannot pass urine in presence of others (Hepar).

Has to wait for a long time before passing urine (Hepar, Staph., Mur. acid), Cutting pain in urethra
after urination (Thuja, Sars.). Sensation as if more urine has remained. Frequent urging for urination;
must pass urine very often.


Natrum Muriaticum a0

Menses :
First menstruation at puberty delayed.
Time: Too early.

Duration: Irregular mense which may be of various types i.e., too early or too late, too scanty or too profuse.

Concomitants: Bearing down pain which is worse in the morning. Hot feeling during menses.
Headache after menses. Sterility with too early and too profuse menstruatton.

Anaemia :
Causation: Loss of vital fluid.

It causes alteration in blood and hence produces anaemia: Cachectic condition and chlorotic look.
Blue rings around the eyes and oedema with other generalities of the drug.

Skin :
Eczema :
* Location: Especially on the margins of hair, scalp, behind the ears.
¢ Look: Raw, red inflamed and ulcerated.
© Modality:
Aggravation : From earing too much salt, at sea shore or from ocean voyage.
Amelioration: In open air and by cold bathing.
Urticaria : Acute or chronic, over whole body, especially after violent exercise.
Herpes : Herpetic eruptions especially around the edges of hair and nape of neck.
Warts : On palms of hands (Anac., On dorsum of hand, Dulc.).

Fever blisters : Blisters at the sides of mouth in intermittent fever, like-small pearls about the
lips with lips dry, sore, crackedand ulcerated.

Nail : Hangnails, skin around the nails dry and cracked (Graph, Petrol.).

Fever :

Natrum mur., is a medicine which should be thought of especially in chronic intermittent fever. The
symptoms are as follows:-
Causation: Abuse of quinine, old, chronic, badly treated and neglected cases of fever.
Character; Periodicity well marked. Chill returns in the morning, especially at 10 to 11 A.M. Fever with severe headache, left sided clavus as if a thousand little hammers were knocking in the brain with coldness of the body and chilliness well marked.

Modality: Sweat on every little exertion with RELIEF OF ALL THE SUFFERINGS.

Concomitants: Fever blisters, especially at the corners of mouth. MAPPED TONGUE with red insular patches..

Look of the baby: Pale, anaemic, weak and emaciated, emaciation especially marked in the neck, with long neck (short neck Kali bich.). There is descending type of marasmus. Baby LOSES
FLESH WHILE LIVING WELL.


440 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Relation with heat and cold: Hot baby, yet the child has great liability to catch cold with frequent
sneezing and watering of the nose.

Modality. The baby is very much cross, irritable even when kindly spoken to, cries from the slightest
cause. The child gets into a passion about trifles, especially when consoled, consolation aggravates all
troubles.

Desire and Aversion: The baby has intense craving for salt and child has great aversion to
bread.
Tongue :
The baby is having MAPPED TONGUE. Slow in learning to talk, with heavy and difficult speech.
Stool: Usually constipated.
Urine: There is involuntary urination while coughing, sneezing and laughing.

Modalities:

° Aggravation : From taking excessive salt and heat of sun.

* Amelioration: Going without regular meals arid open air.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From sunrise to sunset, especially from 10 to 11 a.m. At seashore, from sea air heat of
sun, mental exertion, lying down and by consolation.

Amelioration: In the open air, cold bathing, going without regular meals, lying on right side
(Sulphur).
Relations :

Complementary to: Apis.

Natrum mur. is the chronic of Ignatia, but in mental plane only.

Is followed well by: Sepia and Thuja.
 
chapter:152 NATRUM SULPHURICUM

Seen ee Eee
Sodium Sulphate SCHRETER Na,SO,+10H,O oe

INTRODUCTION

Natrum sulphuricum—Sodium sulphate was discovered by Glauber; hence it is called Glauber’s salt, it is used by the old school as a laxative or purgative. But Homoeopathy has
raised its status and established its great utility jn various diseased conditions like pneumonia, asthma, etc. Schuessler has laboriously explained the role this salt plays in the economy of life and he included it as a member of the tissue remedies. It was studied by Grauvogl, who found in it the hydrogenoid constitutions.

CLINICAL

Asthma, Abdominal disorders, Biliousness, Cough, Diarrhoea, Debility, Diabetes, Epilepsy, Flatulence, Gonorrhoea. Headache, Injury, Liver affection, Meningitis, Pneumonia, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION .

It acts mainly on gastro-intestinal tract, respiratory system and skin. Meninges and. mind are also affected with equal severity. Occasionally, head, conjunctiva and genital
organs are also affected.

PATHOGENESIS

On the alimentary system, it produces a state of inflammation causing jsentery and diarrhoea. Vomiting may also result occasionally. The drug has got its main seat of
action on the respiratory system causing sycotic pneumonia and humid asthma. Its action is undoubtedly directed upon the blood through which it produces irritating
disturbances in nearly every tissue of the body. Meningitis and brain symptoms, due to effects of long-age injury are its characteristic effects.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up; LYDROGENOID CONSTITUTION, where the complaints are due to living in damp houses, basement, cellers, etc.

Temperament: Bilious temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.
Miasm: Sycosis is in the background.



442 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Nee ee ee ee ee ELEEEEEEEEEEISGIEEENEEEEee

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Hydrogenoid Constitution.
2. Left sided affections especially when lower lobe of left lung is affected.
8. Worse by dampness of weather, in damp house and cellers.
4. Discharges are thick, yellowish and greenish.
5, Ailments from abuse of quinine, neglected cases of gonorrhoea and mental trauma.
6. Dirty and greenish, gray or brown coating on the tongue.
7. Music makes her sad.
8. Constant desire to take deep and long breath in wet weather.
9. Burning thirst for very cold drinks, especially in evening.
10. Mind : Mental traumatism, mental effects from injury to head, chronic brain effect of blow and fall. Great anxiety with loathing of life and suicidal tendency. Patient
must use all possible self control to prevent shooting herself. A woman during gestation attempts to hang herself.

There is great fear. Fear of crowd, of evil, of people. Easily frightened.

The patient is very much sad, depressed, gloomy, dislikes to speak or to be spoken to ill-humoured with dislike of conversation.

Sleep disturbed by dreams of fighting.
Satiety of life. Does not like music. Music makes her weep, makes her sad, makes her melancholic (This symptom is inherited from the Natrum family, ie., Natrum carb,
Nat. mur.). Sensation as if the forehead would burst, as if something was forcing its ways out of ears.

11. Ailments from : Fear, suppressed gonorrhoea, abuse of quinine, damp and rainy weather.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Abdomen : Flatulent colic: Pain and tenderness in the whole abdomen. Great flatulence in the
abdomen, with clull, heavy burning, pain in the abdomen, relieved by passing flatus. Cannot bear tight
clothing around the waist, with vomiting of bile. Frequent expulsion of offensive flatus in morning.

Modalities:
© Aggravation before break-fast.
¢ Amelioration: By passing flatus in afternoon.

Hepatitis : Liver is sore to touch with sharp stitching pain in the liver region. Skin and conjunctiva
become yellow. Nausea with vomiting of bile.

Great flatulence in the abdomen, with colic and burning irr abdomen and anus.
The character of stool is watery, yellowish and greenish.


Natrum Sulphuricum 443
(Natur $$ $@$@ AS$@_@$__$__ I

The patient cannot bear tight clothing around the waist. The tongue is dirty, greenish, gray or
brownish; in patients, who are having hydrogenoid constitution and history of suppressed gonorrhoea.

Diarrhoea : ,
© Causation: After a spell of wet weather, living or working in damp basement.

¢ Time: Morning diarrhoea as soon as the patient gets up from the bed, on first rising and
standing on feet (Compare Bryonia, Sulphur).

* Quantity: Profuse, copious.
¢ Character of stool: Sudden urging, gushing out of yellow greenish watery stool with much
flatus.
Involuntary stool while passing flatus.

¢ Modality: Aggravation in the morning, after a spell of a wet weather and living in damp basement.

© Concomitants: Cheerful and happy mood, after loose stool.

Note: Natrum sulph. is indicated in chronic diarrhoea with tuberculosis of intestine (Clarke) in a
sycotic constitution.

Respiratory Symptoms :
Pneumonia : Sycotic pneumonia is often seen in Natrum sulph.
© Causation: From damp, wet weather, living in damp places.
° Stage: Late stage of pneumonia.
© Location: Lower lobe of left lung is usually affected.
© Sensation: All gone sensation in chest, sensation of excoriation in chest.
° Character of sputa: Congestion with thick yellowish greenish, ropy expectoration.
© Character of cough: Dry cough excited by tickling in throat with roughness of trachea.

During cough : There is sharp pain in the left chest; great soreness of chest. While coughing,
thepatient has to sit up in bed and hold chest with the hands.

There may be delayed resolution in pneumonia (Compare-Bryonia).
Modalities:

* Aggravation: From damp, wet weather and rainy weather.
* Ameliortion: By holding chest with the hands.

Concomitants: Dirty, greenish gray or brown coating on tongue. Constant desire to take long deep
breaths in wet season.

Asthma :
* Causation: Sycotic in origin, from exposure to damp cold wet weather.
° Time: 4-5 a.m. (After Ammon.carb., Kali carb).
© Character: Humid asthma, especially in children with every change of weather.
Dyspnoea with desire to take deep breaths, especially in rainy weather.
There is rattling in chest with chronic catarrh of the bronchial tubes.
Frequent attacks of cough with irritation in throat.

Pain : Sharp, shooting, stitching pain in the left chest, stitching, especially on the left side of the
chest. Patient springs up on the bed, has to sit upon bed and hold chest with both the hands.


444 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

© Character os sputa: Sputa is greenish, copious, thick, yellowigh and ropy.
* Tongue: Dirty, greenish, gray or brown coating on the tongue.

© Modalities: Aggravation: From cold, damp, rainy weather. Inline early hours of the
morning.

© Concomitants: With early morning diarrhoea.

Teeth :
There is toothache, with sensation as if the teeth are elongated.
Aggravation: By cold air, smoking tobacco, holding cold drinks in mouth.
Amelioration: In the night and by warm drinks.

Meningitis :
Causation: From injuries to head, chronic brain effects to blows, falls and the like.
Location : Basilar meninges.
Sensation: As if the head was drawn, backwards.

Character of pain: Violent, crushing, gnawing pain at base of brain, tenderness of the spine-
Sore pain in small of back and Sacrum.

Patient:cannot lie on either side.
Along with this there is spasm and mental irritability and delirium. Violent congestion as if all the blood has rushed to the head.
Modalities:
* Aggravation: At night, when lying down or during rest.

© Amelioration: By pressure, changing position and by sitting,

Gonorrhoea :

Natrum sulph. is an excellent remedy in neglected cases of gonorrhoea when the discharges are
thick, yellowish and green, painless, chronic or suppressed.

There is burning in urethra during and after urination, With itching of scrotum which burns after
scratching.
General Modalities :

Aggravation: Damp basement, damp weather, rest, lying down and music.

Amelioration: Dry weather, pressure, changing position.

Relations :

Compatible: Ferrum phos., in polyuria, Nat mur., in skin diseases; Thuja in sycosis and hydrogenoid constitution.

Compare: For hydrogenoid constitution—Thuja, Sabina, Silicea.
Lycopodium: In cough and urine.

Bryonia: In cough and diarrhoea.
Sulphur: In eye symptorns.



chapter : 153 NITRIC ACID

INTRODUCTION

Of the trio of powerful acids, viz., Sulphuric acid (H,SO,)Hydrochloric acid (HCL) and Nitric acid (HNO3), the last one leads
the list in severity and its corrosive effect. But when it is potentised, it becomes an excellent remedy. It is a constitutional
remedy, suitable for both chronic and acute diseases. All the three acids mentioned above are dangerous in their crude form, but when
potentised, they posess very useful therapeutic value. Nitric acid is a chemical product manufactured synthetically and has a wide
range of commercial use.

CLINICAL

Abdominal troubles, Anus-fissures of, Bright’s disease, Bronchitis, Bubo, Chronic catarrh, Chancres, Constipation, Cough,
Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Ear and Eye affection, Glandular swelling, Haemorrhage, Haemorrhoids, Haematuria, Headache, Herpes,
Menstrual troubles, Rickets, Syphilis, Skin troubles, Tongue affection, Ulcers, Urinary disorders, Warts, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Nitric acid acts on blood, skin, mucous membrane glands, bones and gastro-intestinal tract.

PATHOGENESIS

The special seat of ation of Nitric acid is at the junction of skin and mucous embranes of the body, such as mouth, eyes, nose, rectum, anus, vagina, urethra, etc. It
disorganises the blood causing decomposition; it produces intense irritation, resulting in nflammation, destruction, ulceration and even gangrene of the parts. Its action on
gastro-intestinal tract sets in diarrhoea, haemorrhage, etc.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Nitric acid is especially suited to thin, weak and debilitated Prsons with rigid musculature, dark complexion, black hair and eyes. Ugly looking
appearance; with broken down cachectic constitution; anaemic and emaciated; old people WITH MORING Darrhoea (Phos.),

Temperament: Nervous and irritable temperament,

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

445

 
446 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

eee

Miasm: Nitric acid covers all the 8 miasms viz. Psora, Sycosis and Syphilis.

Diathesis: Haemorrhagic diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

Just as in any other acid general weakness debility and feeble reaction run through Te whole of Nitric acid.

. Persons suffering from chronic diseases who take cold easily.

. Easily disposed to diarrhoea rather than constipation.

. Old people with great, weakness and morning diarrhoea.

. Physical irritability is more prominently marked than mental.

. Extreme sensitiveness and nervous trembling; physical and nervous rritability are the red strands of this remedy.

. Urine is very pungent and STRONG SMELLING LIKE HORSE’S URINE.

. Sensation of a band around the head, around the bones (Carb. ac, Anacardium, ulphur); of a splinter in affected parts, such as to ulcers, piles, throat, in growing
toe nails, which is very painful on slightest touch and contact.
. Has particular affinity for the places where skin and mucous membrane join with CACKS AND FISSURES and with splinter like pricking pain.

Skin : Shows ulcers, syphilitic or mercurial or both, or of a sycotic or scrofulous BASE WITH CRID, OFFENSIVE DISCHARGE, warts and condylomata with easily
bleeding tendency on mere touch wrm typical splinter like pain (Causticum).

Pain : Splinter-like pain comes with STICKING AND SENSATION; pain comes Sddenly and goes suddenly phos.

Haemorrhagic tendency from mouth, nose, bowels and uterus which is profuse,
bright red or dark coloured.

. Inflammation and suppuration of glands; especially from abuse of mercury in

syphilitic people, with no tendency to heal up and repair.
Desire for fat, indigestible thing such as chalk, charcoal, stone chips, etc. (Alumina,Cale. carb., Psorinum, Cina, Cicuta). Aversion to meat and bread.

Mind : Mental affection from continued loss of sleep, long lasting anxiety, over Eertion of mind and body, anguish from loss of a dearest and nearest friend,
chronic diseases,etc, Nitric acid patient is very nervous, excitable, peevish and
easily angered at trifling matters,Great indifference; tired of life and is always sad, despondent, depressed and axious.

Great anxiety about his disease; constantly thinking about his past troubles.
Morbid fear of cholera (Arsenic).

Nirtic acid patient is very irritable and head-strong; hateful and vindictive;
inveterate and ill willed.


Nitric Acid 447
SS

Adamant and unmoved by any amount of apology because he is so rude and
unsympathetic.

Very sensitive to rattle of wagons over paved streets to noise touch, pain, jar or motion
Hardness of hearing is relieved by riding in a carriage or train.
Irresistible desire to curse and swear (Anac.).
Great sadness before menses (Ammoncarb., Stannum met.) .
16. Ailments from : Some virulent poison, mercury, syphilis continued loss of sleep,

long lasting anxiety, over-exertion of body and mind, anguish from loss of a dearest   friend or use Digitalis.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Cassation: Resulting from virulent poisoning loss of sleep, anxiety or over exertion or bereavementand from pressure of hat.

Location: Drawing, stitching and throbbing pain, in temples; pressing bone pain in left temple.

Sensation: Congestive headache as if the head was tightly bound up; with sensation of a band round the head.

Character of pain: Pain comes suddenly and goes suddenly, splinter like pricking pain congestive  and throbbing.

Modality: Headache in the morning on waking, disappears on rising; better while riding in a carriage.

Concomitants: Vertigo in the morning with weakness and profuse falling of hair.

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Mouth Putrid breath from mouth with offensive saliva and feeding, soft and spongy gums and loose teeth. Tongue is clean and red. Ulcers on soft palate and in entire mouth with splinter-like pain; mercurialor syphilitic ulcers in mouth with typical pain

Throat : Hoarseness of voice; tonsils swollen, red and ulcerated with PRICKING SPLINTER LIKE PAIN. Diphtheritic membrane on throat, fauces, larynx pharynx; extending to nose with pricking pain: worsen swallowing; burning in throat.

Stomach : Stomach and abdomen are very tense; wants to make the clothes loose; sour or bitter  taste and eructation; weak and debilitated person and whose digestion is weak. There is great appetite and thirst, but cannot digest food. Persistent nausea and vomiting of offensive, undigested food, tenacious  and bloody mucus. Nausea and vomiting are relieved by riding in a carriage. STICKING, SPLONTER LIKE PRICKING PAIN IN ABDOMEN; chronic enlargement of liver and spleen with the typical pain in righthypochondrium; icterus, clay coloured stool. 

Diarrhoea : Nitric acid patient is inclined to have diarrhoelic stool rather than constipation.

© Causation: The reason for the diarrhoea is, as usual, dependent upon some virulent poison, bad
effects of loss of vital fluid, haemorrhage, broken-down cachectic constitution, etc.

* Character of stool: Great desire for stool, but passes little at a time. There is ineffectual urging or stool. Feels that a large amount of stool remains in the rectum to be expelled, but he is unable to doso. Stool may be stained with blood or mucus, undigested food particles. Diarrhoea is acid; acrid, slimy
and watery. Violent cutting pain after stool, lasting for hours (Rat., Sulph.).

Piles : There may also be bleeding piles, protruding with every stool. The blood may be bright redand profuse.
 Character of pain: The piles have burning, lancinating, PRICKING PAIN WITH SPLINTER LIKE sensation There may also be cracks and fissures in rectum with similar pain and bleeding. Violentcutting pains after stool lasting for hours.

Urine :

The urine of a Nitric acid patient is very PUNGENT, STRONG SMELLING LIKE HORSE’S URINE.The urine may be scanty or dark brown or putrid, looks like remains of a cider barrel. The striking pculiarity is that the urine: is COLD WHEN IT PASSES OUT, but while urinating, there may be smarting
and burning pain in the urethra. Occasionally there may also be haematuria with bloody mucus and purulent discharges. The external urethral meatus may be cracked and fissured which is very painful like that froma SPLINTER.

Haemorrhage :

Nitric acid is an excellent remedy for haemorrhage from anywhere and everywhere. It may be from Te mouth, nose, lungs, stomach, haematuria, haemoptysis or haematemesis, or from rectum, and bowels ORuterus after miscarriage, or post-partum, due to over-exertion, chronic diseases or broken down  condition and constitution.

The character of the blood is bright red or may also be dark, but profuse and coagulable withSTICKING, PRICKING, LANCINATING AND SPLINTER LIKE PAIN, relieved only by riding in acarriage.

Skin :

In Nitric acid, the skin shows various manifestations after abuse of mercury or syphilis, or both orengrafted on a scrofulous or sycotic base.

The skin is dry or scaly, yellow, with deep cracks and fissures  

The junction of skin and mucous membrane is the place for which the Nitric acid has got great
affinity. It may be on the lips, corners of mouth, nose, eyes, anus or vagina or urethra. At these places.there are CRACKS AND FISSURES WITH LANCINATING PRICKING, SPLINTER LIKE PAIN.

There may be profuse bleeding from these outlets, cracks and fissures or from ulcers.

There may also be easily bleeding ulcers in corners of mouth, in the mouth, cervix or anywhere and
everywhere with splinter-like pain, The ulcers bleed easily on slightest contact. The ulcers have zig-zag
irregular margin and edges; base looks like raw fresh and exuberant granulations.

From these ulcers, a thin, offensive and acrid discharge of abrown or dirty, yellowigh-green colour
comes out. Rarely there may also be laudable pus.

Another important skin manifestation of Nitric acid is development of warts, condylomata, whether
sycotic or syphilitic, on various parts of the body. These warts may be large, jagged or pedunculated and
bleed easily on washing or on slightest touch there may also be moist, oozing, offensive and acrid
discharges from diem with typical pricking splinter like pain.


wire Acid
General Modalities :

Aggravation: Evening and at night; after mid-night, contact; change of temperature or weather,during sweat, on waking and while walking.

Amelioration: All symptoms are better while riding in a carriage.

Relations :
Complimentary to: Arsenic and Calad.
Inimical to: Lachesis.
Resembles: Arsenic in morbid fear of cholera.
Antidoted by: Calc., Hep., Merc., Mez:, Sul.
It antidotes: Calc., Dig., Merc.
 
chapter : 154 

NUX MOSCHATA

Nutmeg HELBIG Myristicaceae

INTRODUCTION
ramedy drived from the vegetable kingdom. The mother tincture is prepared from the pulverised dry krnel invested in the shell. It was  introduced into Materia Medica by Helbig. The
tree is a native of East and West Indies and  grows well in this equatorial region. The tree
branches freely and is of medium height.Although it is suitable for all kinds and classes of
people, it is particularly adaptable to children,old people and women during pregnancy.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Abortion, Apoplexy, Asthma, Cough, Debility, Deltoidrheumatism, Eructation, Flatulence, Gastralgia, Haemorrhage, Headache, Heart
troubles, Menstrual disorders, Hysteria, Rheumatism, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main seats of action of this drug are mind, nervous system, skin and mucous
membrane, gastro-intestinal tract, respiratory organs, respiratory tract, uterus and
ovaries.

PATHOGENESIS

It acts on.

(a) Nervous system and mind producing stupor, insensibility and unconquerable sleep; weakness of memory and changeable mood.
(b) On skin and mucous membrane, causing great dryness.
(c) On gastro-intestinal tract : resulting in great distension of abdomen anddiarrhoea and other troubles.
(d) On respiratory tract, setting in cough and hoarseness. In addition to rheumatic afections, menstrual disorders, etc. are also within its domain of action.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: It is suited especially to women, and children, with dry skin who
rarely perspire, weak old people who are delicate, sensitive and dyspeptic havinghy dogenoid constitution (Clarke).

Nux Moschata 451
Nux Mosc

Temperament: Nervous and hysterical temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora and sycosis are in the background.
Diathesis: Rheumatic diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

.Drowsiness and sleepiness. The greatest characteristic of Nux moschata isdrowsiness and sleepiness which accompany all ailments. Complaints cause
SLEEPINESS or is accompanied by DROWSINESS. This is the red strand .

.Chilliness is yet another important symptom. The patient is very chilly. All complaintplaints are aggravated by cold and damp weather and relieved by warmth.
. Dryness : This too is equally important. There is great dryness of the skin and mucusmembrane. No other remedy in Mataria Medica has got this symptom so
prominently. The skin is very dry, mouth is so dry that the saliva seems like cottonand the tongue adheres to the root of the mouth. This is the great second key-note of
thisdrug.
Dryness of the eyes is very well-marked. Eyes are too dry for the lids to close.

. Thirsdessness : Inspite of great dryness of the mouth and the skin, curiouslyenough THERE IS NO THIRST (Puls.). This is very well-marked in Nux moschata
which is yet another great key-note of the remedy.
. Oversensitiveness runs thorugh the whole remedy. Oversensitive to light, touch,smell, noise, pain, etc. which causes vertigo, nausea, vomiting and even fainting.
. The patient is very forgetful; absence of mind and indifference. Changeable, mood,hysterical and nervous disposition.
. There is marked tendency to faint ,and inclination to become unconscious; soporouscondition as if intoxicated.
. Flatulent distension of abdomen with consequent diarrhoea.
. Leucorrhoea instead of menses (Cocculus); Physometra (Lyco., Lac can.,Sanguinaria).
Cough is loose after eating and dry after drinking,
Great soreness of all the parts upon which he lies, with tendency to bed sqre (Bapt.,Pyrogen, Ruta).

Mind : The mental symptoms of Nux moschata are yery striking and characteristic
and are as follows:-

The patient is very much absent-minded. She cannot think ot concentrate her mindon anything.
There is marked indifference to everything. She cannot and does not take interest
in anything, whether it is her own affair, domestic, personal or otherwise. Nointerest for anything.
The patient is very much forgetful. Weakness of memory is of the topmost degree.
The forgetfulness is of such a degree that she does not recognise a well known and
quite familiar street and cannot remember anything.

Along with this there is vanishing of thoughts while reading, talking or writing.
Uses wrong words.

The patient is very much perturbed with the unconquerable and irresistible desire
to sleep. Always feels drowsy and sleepy. Side by side, there is stupor and
insensibility too. She is also very much hysterical with frequently changing mood.
One moment laughing, the next moment crying. Sudden change from grave to gay
and from lively to serene mood (Crocus, Ighatia, Platina).

13. Ailments from : Exposure to cold weather; cold drinks, overeating, pregnancy,
fright, mental exertion, suppressed eruption and alcohol.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Headache is caused by overeating. Eating a little more causes headache. There is pressive headache
in small spot on the left frontal eminence.

The patient is very much drowsy and sleepy with dry mouth and no thirst.

Gastrointestinal tract :

Mouth : There is gret dryness of mouth, lips and throat. Tongue is so dry that it adheres to the
palate. There is no saliva in the mouth to be expectorated or swallowed. Saliva seems like cotton.

Throat is also very dry and stiff; yet there rs NO THIRST. Toothache Curing pregnancy. At every
menstrual period, the mouth, throat and tongue are intolerably dry; especially when sleeping.

Stomach : Abdomen is enormously distended, with rumbling in abdomen; especially after every
meal. Eating a little in excess causes various troubles, such as headache, pain and distress in the stomach.
There is pain in the stomach during eating or immediately after eating (Kali. bi. Bry.). Flatulent
dyspepsia, especially of old people. There is great appetite, but no thirst. Pressure and pain in liver and
right hypochondrium. Pain, nausea and vomiting during pregnancy.

Stool : Stool is soft and foetid, but expelled with difficulty. Rectum is inactive. Diarrhoea in summer,
from cold drinks and epidemic in autumn. Stool is white. Diarrhoea from boiled milk, or during dentition;
during pregnancy; with sleepinss and fainting. Diarrhoea with undigested stool or like chopped egg with
loss of Appetite.

Respiratory Symptoms :

There is sudden hoarseness which is aggravated from walking against the wind (Euph., Hepar). The
patient suffers from severe cough. Cough Is caused by getting warm in bed, or from being overheated,
from bathing or standing in water, living in cold damp places. The peculiarity of the cough is that it is
loose after eating and dry after drinking with oppression of chest.

Heart : There is violent palpitation with weak pulse. Feeling of rush of blood to heart and then to
the head and from there all over the body.


a

Nux Moschata 453
| os eens.)
Female genital organs :

There is suppression of menses, or instead of menses, ther may be leucorrhoea. During menstrual
period, the mouth, throat and fongue become intolerably dry especially when sleeping. The patient
awakes with absolutely dry tongue.

Quite often there may be discharge of flatus from vagina, Physometm (Lac. can., Lyco.,
Sanguinaria).

Pain, nausea and vomiting during pregnancy or from wearing pessaries. There may also be toothache
during pregnancy.

Frequently, Nux moschata is an infallible remedy for rheumatic affection, which may be caused by
getting feet wet, or from exposure to draughts of air while heated. Rheumatism of the left shoulder. (Fer.
met.). Rheumatic affections are aggravated in cold, wet weather or keeping in cold wet clothes.

Backache caused by riding in a carriage is also relieved by this remedy. The patient must lie down
after least exertion which causes much fatigue.

General Modalities : -

Aggravation: Cold, wet.windy weather (Rhod.); weather changes, cold food, water and cold washing;
carriage driving (Cocculus, Sepia); lying on painful side (on painless side, Puls.).

Amelioration: In dry, warm weather, warm room; wrapping up warmly.

Relations :

Nux moschata antidotes mercurial inhalation, lead colic, oil of turpentine, spirituous liquors. and
especially the bad effects of beer.

chapter : 155 NUX VOMICA

Poison Nut HAHNEMANN Loganiaceae
INTRODUCTION
Nux vomica is the male countepart ofPulsatilla and Ignatia. It is the most “Frequently
looked for”? medecine in the box of everyHomoeopath. The remedy is indispensable becauseit is:
(a) The first remedy indicated after muchdosing with allopathic drugs.
(b) The best remedy with which tocommence treatment of cases that havebeen drugged by various schools.
c) Hahnemann’s GREATESTPOLYCHREST REMEDY.
(d) Applicable to both acute and chronic ailments.
(e) Pre-eminently the remedy for any of thexonditions incidental to and arising fromthe so called MODERN CIVILIZED LIFE.
(f) A suitable remedy for people of every age, sex and temperament.
(g) The remedy which is capable of working wonders for people of all walks of lifefrom the lowest to the highest standard, in both civilised and un-civilisedclasses.

The remedy is a unique gift from the vegetable kingdom. The tree is grown as a wild
plant found in the equatorial region. In its crude form, there may not be anything more
bitter than its seed.
It is also very poisonous. After undergoing the process of potentisation, the bitterness
and the poisonous effects of the seed are transformed into a marvellous curative power,
affecting each and every organ and system. But for the historic invention of Hahnemann
of this wild seed, millions of suffering people could not have been redeemed of their
various ailments.

Just as the Nux vomica seed is bittermost, poisonous and wild, so also are the Nux
vom. patients, like the drug itself, difficult to study.

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Anger—effects of, Apoplexy, Asthma, Bilious attack, Bladder—affection
of, Bronchial troubles, Catarrh, Cold, Colic, Constipation, Convulsion, Cough, Croup,
Delirium, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Dyspepsia, Fever, Gastro-intestinal disorders, Gall-stone,

454


nux Vomnica . 455
ee
Gout, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Heart affection, Hernia, Labour, Liver affections,
Locomotor ataxia, Lumbago, Menstrual disorers, Paralysis, Pregnancy disorders, Sleep,
Tenesmus, Throat and Lung affections, Urinary disorders, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Although every organ is susceptible to the action of Nux vomica, it predominantly
acts on spinal cord, motor and sensory centres, brain, gastro-intestinal tract, respiratory
organs, cardiovascular system, genito-urinary organs.

PATHOGENESIS

By its action on the spinal cord, brain, motor and sensory nerve centres, a condition
of EXCESSIVE IRRITATION AND EXCITABILITY is produced which causes muscular
incoordination and paralysis. It acts on the organs and their nutrition, thereby the
secretions are altered, functions are perverted and the organic; substances change. A
long chain of symptoms set in presenting an accurate picture of gastric, hepatic and
intestinal affections. It irritates the mucous membrane of alimentary tract, thereby
producing dyspepsia like symptoms and stimulate constipation, diarrhoa, dysentery, etc.
Affections of the respiratory system result in dry catarrhal condition, obstruction of nose
and cough. It stimulatesthe vasomotoricentre and thus gives rise to blood pressure, heart
symptoms etc.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Nux vomica is ideally suited to thin spare subjects, with dark
hair and dark complexion, who lead a sedentary life, nervous, extremely susceptible to
external impressions, habituated to overstudy, debauches, zealous and hypochondriac.
People of all walks of life, from the highest to the lowest standard, richest or poorest,
civilised or unciuilsed.

Temperament: Bilious, sanguine, irritable and impatient temperament.

“Nux is chiefly successful with persons of an ardent character; of an irritable,
impatient temperament, disposed to anger, spite or deception’—says Hahnemann.
Relation with heat and cold: Nux vom. is a very CHILLY remedy.
Miasm: Definitely psora isin the background as the originator of all the troubles.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It is the LEST REMEDY TO COMMENCE TREATMENT of cases that have been
unduly drugged by other schools as an antidote to the bad-eftects.

2. Fof all consequences and results arising from and incidental to modem life, people
of all walks of life age, sex and temperament.

3 Oversensitiveness runs through the whole remedy. He is very sensitive to
external impressions such as light, noise, odour, touch, pain, cold, music, etc.
Hypersensitive and over-impressionable.

4. Debauches of thin, irritable nervous disposition, liable to indigestion and hepatictroubles.


. Literary and studious persons who suffer from lack of exercise, always staying at homeving sedentary life with gastric troubles, especially of drunkards.

. Sleep : There is irresistible desire to sleep in the evening. Cannot keep from falling
asleep while sitting or reading even hours before bed time and consequently thepatient is compelled to retire and sleep. Nevertheless, he awakes at about 3 or 4
a.m. and then falls into a dreamy sleep early in the morning from which he is hardto arouse and if aroused, then he feels tired and weak, unrefreshing sleep in the
morning (rev. Pulsatilla).
. Frequent and ineffectual desire for stool and urine (Colch.,Con.). passes small

quantity each time, with temporary relief and satisfaction with digestivedisturbances and portal congestion and hepatic troubles.
. Convulsion with consciousness (Stram.), worse by touch and movement, light andodour.
. Functional disturbances in the domain of sensory and motor nerve fibres, with
tendency to reflex phenomena taking precedence over the voluntary.Tonic and clonic spasm of limbs and muscles.

Great tendency to take cold and aversion to cold air. The patient is compelled toCLOSE THE DOORS AND WINDOWS AND COVER UP THE BODY.
There is lack of balance.

Brain fag, full of hysterical manifestations.

Constipation due to irregular peristalsis of intestinal tract.

A stasis of the portal system occurs with consequent troubles therefrom.
Desire for stimulants, pungent and bitter things, alcohol and fat food.
Aversion to bread, water, coffnd tobacco and ordinary food and drink.

Mind : The peculiar mental symptoms, ALL CONSEQUENT UPON THE
MODERN SO CALLED CIVILIZED LIFE AND HIGH LIVING, originating from
irritation of the nervous system and brain, readily serve to identify Nux vomica
from others.

The patient is VERY IRRITABLE, careful, fastidious, zealous and is despondent
and quarrelsome, spiteful and malicious.

He is very nervous and melancholic, impatient, of an ardent character, disposed to
anger, spite and deception. Egoism prevails supreme in him.

Anxiety and irritability with inclination to commit suicide prevail, though the
patient is afraid to die.

Wants to be alone (Ign., Gels., Sepia).

Easily becomes angry at very silly matters, trifling ailments are unbearable; every
harmless word offends.

Ill-humoured, finds fault with everybody and scolds them. Mental derangement in
drunkards. Low muttering delirium.


ux Vomica 457
EE
48. Ailments from : High hung, so-called modern living, coffee, tobacco, alcohol,
quinine, taking highly spiced seasoned food, irregular diet, overeating, sexual
excess, long continued mental exertion, sedentary habits, want of exercise, loss of
sleep, using aromatic patent medicines, pills or exposure to cold.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: As a result of the bad effects of the modern so called civilised high living, taking coffee,
tobacco, alcohol, wine, highly spiced seasoned food, irregular diet, overheating, indulging in sexual
excess, long continued mental exertion, sedentary habits, want of exercise, loss of sleep, taking aromatic
medicines, pills or exposure to cold and the like, headache with typical symptoms arise in the patient
calling for this great polychrest.

Sensation: Sensation as if the head would burst with congestion, heaviness and pressure.

Character of headache: Headache of gastric origin, congestive headache, with heaviness of head,
especially in the morning. The patient feels as if the head would burst, heaviness and pressure in the head.
Scalp is very sensitive to touch.

Modalities: Aggravation in the moming, by loss of sleep, touch and noise. Relief by vomiting,
warm application, in warm room, from sitting quiet and lying down in a dark room.

Concomitants: A sense of stupefaction and confusion as if intoxicated; vertigo as if the brain were
moving in a circle with a very transient loss of conciousness. Vertigo with obstruction of sight, dizziness
and humming in ears; nausea and vomiting.

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : Foetid ulceration in the mouth. Gums swollen and bleeding. FOETID AND SOUR TASTE
IN THE MOUTH IN MORNING. Anterior half of the tongue clean and the posterior coated white, furred,
cracked on edges, sometimes the tongue is, yellow, thick and ulcerated and cracked. Toothache worse
from cold and better from warmth.

Throat : Stitching pain in the throat, radiating to ears on swallowing. Ulceration extends to throat
from mouth, tingling sensation in uvula.

Stomach : Stomach troubles are caused by coffee, tobacco, alcohol, highly spiced seasoned food,
irregular diet, overeating, aromatic patent medicines, purgatives, etc. Sensation of weight and pain in the
stomach. Flatulence and pyrosis, tightness, sour or bitter eructation, nausea and vomiting, constant
nausea after eating especially in the morning. PATIENT FEELS “IF | COULD ONLY VOMIT, | WOULD
BE SO MUCH BETTER’, So he induces vomiting for relief. VERY HUNGRY, yet there is aversion to
food. Nux is one of the leading remedies for gastritis, gastralgia and dyspepsia. It can also be given as a
routine remedy for want of appetite. Stomach region is very sensitive tip touch and pressure. There is
also intolerance of tight bandage around the waist, must loosen clothes. Abdomen is bloated. Pressure an
hour or two after eating as from a stone, cannot use mind for 2 or 3 hours after food, vomiting of bile,
vomiting of pregnancy. Disordered stomach from overeating, taking alcohol, coffee, drugs, night
watching, high living,debauchery, from sedentary habits, etc. Constrictive cramp like pain in the stomach.
There may also be flatulent, distension with spasmodic colic which is aggravated by uncovering.

Enlarged liver in drunkards, stitching pain and soreness. Shortness of breath.caused by upward
Pressure of gas with ineffectual urge for stool and urine. Jhrobbing pain from hepatic abscess, gall stone
with jaundice.


458 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Stool : Whatever may be the disease whether dysentery, diarrhoea or constipation, it matters little,
if it is caused by any of the reasons stated above. Nux Vomica is the remedy if the following stool
symptoms are present:

(a) Dysentery: There is great tenesmus and mucus with stool: frequent ineffectual urging (Colch.,
Con.) with gripping pain and soft stool. There may be temporary relief and satisfaction after
stool for the time being only to renew the urge very soon. Passes small quantity of stool with muc
us and blood at a time, with sensation “as if not finished”.

(b) Constipation: With frequent ineffectual desire for stool and urine, with constrictive sensation and
pressure in rectum and anus; protruding blind piles. After stool there is temporary relief and
satisfaction only again to renew the urge suddenly. Sensation as if more stool remains to be
evacuated. Obstinate constipation and diarrhoea alternate (Ant. c., Ant. t., Podo., Sulph., Chel,
Ver. alb.) in persons who have taken purgatives during all through their previous years.

(c) Diarrhoea: Diarrhoea alternates with constipation in persons who have taken laxatives and
aromatic medicines throughout their lives. Their is frequent desire for stool, stool is watery and
offensive, passes little quantity at a time with temporary satisfaction. Urge for stool in the morning
after rising or after mental exertion, with ineffectual desire for stool and urine.

Urine : Ineffectual urging for urination: Micturition is very painful. Pain extends to genital organs
and legs. Urine passes in drops with burning, tearing pain in the urethra. Urine may be mixed with blood
due to RENAL STONE.

Respiratory symptoms :

Causation: Exposure to cold, irregular diet, coffee, tea, alcohol, etc. Respiratory troubles of gastric
origin.

Character: There is catarrhal hoarseness in throat with stitching, spasmodic, constrictive pain.
ASTHMA WITH FULLNESS IN STOMACH AND ASTHMA OF GASTRO INTESTINAL origin. Cough
with shallow respiration; oppressed breathing, violent cough. Cough dry and fatiguing, persisting from
mid-night till morning. Snuffles of infants with catarrah and coryza WHICH IS DRY AT NIGHT AND
FLUENT BY DAY.

Modalities:
* Aggravation: In a warm room.
° Amelioration: By sitting in cold place or on stone steps, in cold air and in damp wet weather.

Concomitants: There is bursting headache and gripping pain in the stomach. Along with cough and
asthmatic tendency, there is palpitation of the heart, especially pnf lying down after dinner; palpitation
with inclination to vomit, with ineffectual desire for stool and urine.

Menses :
Nux vomica is an infallible remedy for menstrual disorders, and the symptoms are as follows:
© Time: Too early.
© Duration: Long lasting, keeping on for several days.
© Quantify: Too profuse.
© Character of blood: Dark and offensive.

Nux vomica is an excellent remedy for irregular menses; never in time, stopping and starting
again, menses in two weeks.


Nux Vomica 459

© Concomitants: All complaints appear at onset, remain during and afterwards. Aggravation of all
old complaints with ineffectual desire for stool and urine. Prolapse of uterus during merises. Metrorrhagia
with sensation as if bowels will move.

Lobour pain :

Violent, spasmodic labour pain, causing sudden urge to pass stool and urine. Tendency to faint after
every labour pain; ineffectual labour pain, extends to rectum; pain aggravates in the back; patient prefers
a warm room.

Hernia :

It is capable of curing cases of STRANGULATED hernia, particularly umbilical in children (Lyco.,
Plumbum, Aconite).

Lumbago :

Backache in lumbar region. Sitting is very painful. Back is very sensitive to touch. Numbness of the
back as if paralysed, worse from 3 to 4 a.m. Backache from sitting on a cold stone; sexual excess and
from masturbation. Must sit up and turn the body in bed before he can look around.

Fever :

Nux vomica is particularly indicated in intermittent fever. During fever, the patient MUST BE
COVERED FROM HEAD TO FOOT IN EVERY STAGE; CHILL, HEAT AND SWEAT.

Cold stage: Predominates. There is great repugnance to cold or to cold air. Very chilly on least
movement, or being uncovered. Chill not relieved by external heat. During chill stage there isexcessive
rigor and shuddering.

During heat stage: There is great heat on the entire body. Whole body burns hot, with red and hot
face; still the patient cannot move or uncover without being chilly.

Concomitants: Ineffectual urging for stool and urine, bitter taste in mouth with gastric disorder.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Morning, waking at 4 a.m., by mental exertion, after eating or over-eating, touch,
Noise, anger, spices, narcotics, during dry weather and in cold air.Or iis In the evening, while at rest; lying down, and in damp wet weather (Caust, Hepar,
Relations :
Complimentary to: Sulphur in nearly all diseases, Sepia.
Inimical to: Zincum met. Must not be used before or after.
Follows well after: Ars., Ipecac., Phosphorus, Sepia, Sulphur.
Is followed by: Bryonia, Pulsatilla, Sulphur.

Note : Nux should be given at the time of retiring or, what is better, at the time of several hours
before going to bed, AS IT ACTS BEST DURING REPOSE OF MIND AND BODY (Thuja).

chapter : 156
ONOSMODIUM

False Gromwell W.E. GREEN Boraginaceae

CLINICAL

Amblyopia. Breast-affection of; atrophy of;
Debility. Diplopia. Eyes-affection of. Headache.
Sexual, stony.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1)A remedy for migraine where theindications are :

Causation : Headache from eyestrain and
sexual weak-ness. Location—Occipito-
frontol pain, chiefly left side.
Sensation—Dull headache with sensation of
heaviness and dizziness. Dull heavy pain pressing upward in occiput.
Modality : Agg. Lying down, in the dark, motion.

Ame. From sleep.
2) Onosmdodium is very rich in eye symptoms. The eye symptoms may be due to
hyperaemic condition of optic disc, enlargement of retinal vessels, muscular
asthenopia and paretic condition of internal eye muscles. There is pain in eyeballs
between orbit and ball, extending to left temple. Eyes feel strained, heavy and
dull. Vision is impaired or blurred.

Modality: Aggravation—From using the eyes.

3) Sexual weakness in both sexes males and females. The sexual desire is
completely destroyed. In Onosmodium impotency is of more psychical
character.
4) Breast : There is aching in breast and itching of nipples. Yingling prescribed
Onosmodium in a woman whose breast was only partially developed with dryness
of the mouth, throat and nose and the usual size of breast was restored.
5) Male : In Onosmodium impotency is more of psychical character. There is loss of
desire, deficient erections & early emissions.
6) Female;In female sexual desire is completely destroyed. With this there
may be history of too early, too prolonged menses & severe bearing down pains in
uterine region.

Leucorrhoea : Profuse yellow & acrid discharge.


chapter : 157  OPIUM

Poppy HAHNEMANN Papaveraceae

INTRODUCTION

Opium is a strong poison and is obtainedfrom the unripe capsules of the poppy plant.
It contains at least twenty different alkaloidssuch as morphine, apo-mor-phine, codeine,
narcotine etc. Hahnemann says, “Opium isalmost the only medicine that in its
primary action does not produce asingle pain” Opium is a long acting,
constitu-tional, polychrest medicine havingremarkable actions in several diseases.

CLINICAL

Apoplexy, Brain affection, Colic. Constipation. Epilepsy. Fear-effects of. Marasmus.
Paralysis. Sleepiness. Sleeplessness. Sunstroke. Typhoid. Urinary complaints etc,
SPHERES OF ACTION

It is a polychrest medicine of wide range. Its chief action is on mind, senses and
nerves of the body. Also acts on skin and mucous membranes of the different tracts such
as respiratory, digestive and urinary.

PATHOGENESIS

The symptoms produced by opium poisoning vary according to the quantity of opium
taken. In mild doses it causes a sort of exhilarating effect on emotional side more than
the intellectual sphere for a short duration. In increased doses it produces the symptoms
which simulates an attack of apoplexy.

Opium lessens voluntary movements, contracts pupils, depresses higher intellectual
Powers, lessons self control and power of concentration, judgment, stimulates the
lmagina-tion. It checks all secretions except that of skin, which is excited.
CONSTITUTION

, Make up of the body: It is especially adapted to diseases of first and second childhood
Le. to children and old people. Persons with light hair, lax muscles, and want to bodily
uritability. Children with wrinkled skin, look like a little dried up old man.

Heat cold relation : Hot patient.
GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Want of susceptibility to well selected remedies due to lack of vital reaction.
Especially in nervous diseases (Ambra. G., Valer.)

2) Painlessness is a grand characteristic of opium. Patient complains of nothing,
wants nothing.

3) Sleep—It has many important sleep symptoms which are as follows :
(a) Sleepiness—It is one of Nash’s three remarkable remedies for sleepiness, others
being Antim Tart and Nux Moscheta.
(b) Sleep is heavy, stupid, with half-closed eyes during sleep.
(c) Stertorous rattling or breathing with great stuporous sleep.
(d) Sleeplessness with acuteness of hearing, clock striking and cocks crowing at agreat distance keeps her awake.
(e) Sleepy but cannot sleep (Bell., Chamo., Stram.)
(f) Picking of bed clothes during sleep.
(g) Loss of breath on falling asleep (Ammon C., Digi., Lac Can., Lach.)
4) Complaints from fright while fear still persists.
5) Delirium: Patient constantly talks during delirium. Eyes glossy and wide open orhalf closed. Face red & puffed. He thinks he is not at home.
6) Delirium Tremens in old emaciated persons, bloated face, stupor, eyes burning hot,dry with loud snoring.
7) Bed feels so hot she cannot lie on it and she moves often in search of a cold place.
8) Sweat: as a concomitant is a characteristic of opium. Complaints appearing with
perspiration. Hot perspiration over whole body except lower limbs.
9) Stool: Involuntary black and offensive from paralysis of sphincter especially afterfright. :
10) Urine : retained or involuntary after fright (suppression of urine, bladder empty—stram).
11) Inactivity of digestive organs resulting in reversed peris-taltic motion. Faecalvomiting.
12) Ailments from bad effects of fright, fear still remaining, from charcoal vapours.
from inhaling gas, alcohol, approach of stranger, from nursing after fright of
mother, from crying, lead poisoning, excessive use of tobacco, suppression of or
sudden retrocession of acute exanthema, from excessive joy, anger, shame,
emotion, sun etc.
13) Mentals : Opium is a great remedy for distinct and characteristic mental symptomswhich are as follows :

The patient complains of nothing, wants nothing. She tells you she is not sick,
though she has passed no stool or urine or she has a temperature of 105-106°, There
is confusion of mind, delirium with great stupor. In delerium patient is con-stantly
talking, especially when aroused. Her face looks besotted, red puffed, eyes glassy
and half closed with loud snoring. The patient thinks she is not at home. (Bry.)
which is continually in her mind. During sleep picking of bed clothes is marked.
Opium . 463
Bed feels so hot she cannot lie on it: moves often in search of a cold place. It is one of
the topmost medicines for com-plaints originating from fright, when fear or the idea of
fear remains or the cause of it comes before the eyes. There is also a sensation of bodily
well being and great happiness. Great sensibility to sound, light, and faintest odors.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal Tract:
Mouth: Dryness of mouth. Tongue black. Paralysed. Intense thirst (unquenchable).

Stomach : All gone, sinking, hungry feeling is not relieved by eating. Patient is
hungry but has no desire to eat. Nausea, retching and vomiting, with sourness of
stomach. There is inactivity, sluggishness of digestive organs causing reverse peristalsis
which results in faecal vomiting.

Abdomen : Abdomen is hard, bloated & tympanitic. Colic after lead poisoning or
painter’s colic. Very violent, griping as if intestines are cut to pieces. Colic is
accompanied with an urge for stool and there is discharge of hard faeces.

Diarrhoea : Causation—After fright, from paralysis of rectum. Involuntary stool
after fright (Gels.) Stool is black, offensive & frothy, Persistent diarrhoea in those treated
with large doses of the drug,

Constipation :

Causation : Lead poisoning. Inaction or paretic condition of intestine. Opium is
suited to almost uncomparable chronic constipation. Opium renders the instestines so
sluggish that the most active purgatives lose their power. Constipation of children and of
corpulent, good natured women. There is no activity, no desire to go to stool.

Character of stool : Stool hard dry round black balls (Cheli., Plumb., Thuja). Faeces
protrude and recede (Sil., Thuja, Sam.)

Urine : There is involuntary urination or retention after fright. Paralysis of bladder
or sphincter may be after excessive use of tobacco, in nursing children after passion of
nurse or in fever or acute illness.

Child : Look—Children with light hair, lax muscles, and want of bodily irritability.
In marasmus, child looks like a little dried up old man with wrinkled skin. They suffer
from spasms & convulsions after sudden retrocession of acute exanthema, from nursing
after fright of mother (Hyos.—after anger of mother, Cham., Nux Vom.) and from crying.
During spasm eyes half open and upturned (eyes turned downward-Aethusa). Screams
before and during spasms (Apis., Hell.) Convulsion in warm room. He becomes
unconscious and cold as corpse after warm bath. Child usually constipated with hard,
black, dry stool like sheep dung.

There is also involuntary stool after fright and involuntary urination or retention in
nursing children after a fit of passion in nurse. Child is hot blooded with hot
perspiration. He wants cool open air, wants to be uncovered. Opium is to be thought of
for those children whose moral sense has never been developed, who lie and steal.




Fever: Fever with besotted countenance. Face red and bloated with half closed eyes.
There may be low temperature or of 105-10G°F. but tells he is not sick. Wants nothing.

Pulse :Full and slow.

Thirst :Unquenchable.

Heat : All over the body. Hot perspiration.

Delirium : Constantly talking. Patient thinks he is not at home.

Bed feels so hot she cannot lie on it. Moves often in search of a cool place. Wants to
be uncovered.

Concomitant: Fever characterised by stupor, snoring, respiration, twitching of
limbs and sleepiness.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : During and after sleep (Apis, Lach.) ; while perspiring ; from warmth;
; stimulants.

Amelioration : From cold ; constant walking.
Relations :

Antidotes, for poisonous doses : strong coffee, Nux, Ipe, Passi, Ber and constant
motion.
When symptoms correspond, the potencies may antidote bad effects of Opium
drugging.
Compare : Apis, Bell., Gels, Nux Mos, Morph.


chapter : 158 OXALIC ACID


Sorrel Acid NEIDHARD C,H,D,2H,0


INTRODUCTION

If Opium is the painless remedy, Oxal ac. may
be considered its antithesis : it causes pains
excruciating beyond description, and it has this
grand keynote distinction, that its pains are all
aggravated when the patient thinks of them. And
not only that, thinking of pains and conditions will
bring them on when they are not actually present.

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris. Aphonia. Backache.
Gastrodynia. Headache. Lung affection. Meningitis.
Myelitis. Neurasthania. Oxaluria. Paralysis. Urinary
com-plaints. Vnmiting of pregnancy.

SPHERE OF ACTION

It acts on digestive tract, genitourinary organs, spinal cord and nerves and left lung.

PATHOGENESIS

It is both corrosive and true poison. It causes pains excruciating beyond description,
corrosion of passages, destruction of mucous membrane. It influences the spinal cord,
and produces motor paralysis, coldness of surface, numbness, mottled skin, blue
nails are present in all degrees of its action and are leading notes for its use. It
may even cause death by exhaustion.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) All pains aggravated when thinking of them. Even must urinate and defaecatewhen thinking of it. (Calc. Phos., Melon, Medo. Baryta Garb. Gels.)
2) Left sided remedy having special action over lower lobe of left lung (Nat. Salph.,Rumex)
3) Sharp lancinating pain through the lower lobe of left lung is the great characteristicof oxalic acid.
4) Terrible pain in lumber region over regions of both kidneys extending down thigh.
5) Pain in small spots (Ign., Kali Bi., Lil Tig.), Pain aggravates from motion andslightest touch.
6) Nervous aphonia alternates with Heart symptoms (Palpitation).
7) Ailments from : Thinking of complaints, coffee, wine, sour fruits, sugar etc.

PARTICULARS

Eyes:
Hyperasthesia of retina. Severe pain in eyes, feel expanded.

Headache :

There is pressing pain in spots or sore, tender spots on the scalp. Band like sensation about head and sense of heat. Headache before and during stool and better after stool. Worse left side, from wine, lying after sleep, slightest touch and light while thinking about it.

G.Ltract disorder :

Causation : Eating sour fruits, apples, tomatoes, grapes, sugar and starchy food. Sensation of heat in mouth, throat and stomach ultimately turning into an intense burning pain. Great pain in umbilical region aggravates in evening & night. Stitching pains in liver relieved by deep breathing. Bitter and sour eructation, worse at night. Epigastric pain relieved by passing flatus. Burning in small spots in abdomen.

Stool: Diarrhoea from coffee with watery, bloody, mucous stool.

Urinary-symptoms : The renal region is painful and tender with soreness of whole urinary tract. When urinating there is pain in glans penis and burning in urethra. Frequent uri-natiorrwith copious urine containing oxalate of lime. All the urinary symptoms are worse when thinking about them; even he must urinate when thinking about it.

Male : Terrible neuralgic pains in spermatic cord- Testicles feel contused and heavy. Seminal
Vesiculitis.

Heart: On of the greatly neglected remedies for heart com-plaints.

“Sharp lancinating pains through the lower lobe of the left lung” is very characteristic symptom in cases of Angina pectoris, also in pneumonia, pleurisy etc. There is most dif-ficult breathing

with choking feeling in larynx. Loss of voice alternates with palpitation. Stitching pain behind the stemum going to shoulders and arms, worse on left side.

Pulse irregular, intermittent, fast.

Concomitant: Blue nails and lips, cold sweat, paralysis of lower limbs, spasmodic respiration and reat weakness. Modality: Worse on slight exertion and motion and while thinking of ailments.

Extremities : There is numbness, weakness & tingling in extremities. Lower extremities blue, cold & insensible. Draw-ing & lancinating pains shooting down extremities. Pain start from spine extend through extremities. Muscular prostration, Myelitis. Multiple cerebral and posterior spinal sclerosis.

General Modalities :
Aggravation : leftside, slightest touch, light, shaving. Thinking of complaints.

Relations :
Campare : Ars., Colch., Arg., Pic. acid.
chapter :159 PASSIFLORA INCARNATA

Passion flower Passifloraceae

This remedy has not been proved thoroughly. For the knowledge of this remedy we are mainly indebted to Hale, who introduced it to
Homoeopathy. It is an efficient anti-spas-modic remedy of our materia medica and very useful in
convulsions in children, trismus, chorea and other spas-modic affections. It is also needed in delirium
tremens, who-oping cough, hysteria, puerperal convulsions, asthma, neuralgia & worm fever.

Passiflora has a quieting effect on the nervous system and it induces normal sleep. So it
is frequently given for insomnia. There is restless and wakeful sleep especially in the feeble, infants and the aged with history of mental
worries and over work. Many cases of Convulsions, epilepsy, insom-nia etc. have been reported cured with this medicine in mas-sive doses.
The dose varies from ten drops to one drum of the tincture according to the age of patient.

PETROLEUM
Coal oil or Rock oil HAHNEMANN Anthracite
INTRODUCTION

This product from the interior of the earth, when, used as a remedial agent, “can help a Homoeopathic physician to fight variety of
diseases”, so says the Master. This crude oil is purified with the help of sulphuric acid before it
undergoes the process of potentisation. Kent says that petroleum is one of the drugs abused by his
colleagues of the orthodox school of medicines and when it is used in rheumatism and bruises
as an external application on the surface, this is not its homoeopathic action.

CLINICAL

Anaemia, Angina pectoris, Abdominal disorders, Constipation, Diarrhoea, Eczema,
Haemorrhoids, Headache, Peptic ulcer, Psoriasis, Rheumatism, Skin affection, Vomiting, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts chiefly upon the skin and mucous membrane, especially of gastro-intestinal tract. Underwood claims that it has action on heart, meninges and cerebrum too.

PATHOGENESIS

The skin bears the brunt of the action of the drug. It produces a number of skin changes mainly of dry character as a result of irritation manifesting as CRACKS AND FISSURES. On brain and heart when it acts, it produces tonic and clonic convulsion with oppression, giddiness, palpitation of heart and faintness.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Adapted to persons of light hair and light skin who suffer from cutaneous eruptions and gastro-intestinal disorders.

Temperament: Irritable, quarrelsome, easily offended by trifles and vexed on everything.

Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is definitely in the background.

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.




Petroleum 469

Petroveurmy

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Symptoms are WORSE IN WINTER, especially skin disease. Skin is rough, bleeds and with numerous CRACKS AND FISSURES. There is tendency for every little injury to suppurate. Skin eruptions are dry with violent itch.

. There is foul smelling sweat all over the body, particularly in the affected area ofthe skin.
. Symptoms appear and disappear rapidly.
. Ailments are worse before and during a thunderstorm (Gels., Phos., Psorinum.,Rhux tox., Rhod.).
. Feeling of emptiness in the stomach, relieved by eating.
. Diarrhoea only in the daytime.
.Aversion to meat and fat food.
. Long lasting complaints follow mental state, fright, vexation, etc.
. Mind : During sleep or delirium, imagines that one leg is double, that another

person lies alongside him in the same bed. Thinks that there are two babies in the bed. Feels that death is near and must hurry to settle affairs. Low spirited withdimness of vision.

Ailments from : Riding in a carriage, car or ship, fright, vexation and eating cabbage.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Carriage riding.
Location: In occiput.

Sensation: Heaviness in the head, pressing and pulsating pain in the head. Sensation as if head is made up of wood.

Character; Scalp is sore to touch, followed by numbness, throbbing and bursting headache.
Modality: Aggravation during a thunderstorm, carriage riding (Cocculus).

Concomitants: With headache there is vertigo on rising, in occiput, like sea sickness.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Stomach : Gastralgia of pregnancy, with heartburn and sour eructation.
Nausea with accumulation of water in the mouth.
Character of pain: Pressing and drawing pain in stomach.
Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: Whenever the stomach is empty.
e Amelioration: By constant eating (Anac., Sepia, lod., Chel.).

Diarrhoea :

* Causation: Due to suppression of skin eruption. after taking cabbage, sour krout, during
pregnancy and stormy weather.

© Character of stool: Yellowish, watery, gushing out, with itching of anus.
* Sensation: With diarrhoea empty feeling in stomach.

© Modality: Diarrhoea only in the daytime (Only during night— China. Puls., Chel.).
Skin :

The skin of Petroleum is rough, ragged, exfoliated and bleeding. “Cracks and fissures all over the body” or in affected area, is the key-note symptom of Petroleum. Every little injury suppurates. Dry type of skin eruption on tip of fingers, rough, cracked, which is painful and sensitive to touch.

It has got power to throw out vesicles and the tendency of vesicles is to form thick yellowish crust with considerable moisture.

All the eruptions itch violently; he cannot rest until he scratches the skin off, and the parts become moist, bloody, raw and inflammed. Scratching seems very comfortable.

Various forms of eczema especially of scalp and occiput.

Herpetic eruption about the mouth, lips, genitals.

Foul smelling sweat all over, the skin.

Modality: Aggravation: Skin symptoms are worse in winter and better in summer.

The eruptions of PETROLEUM are like that of Graphites.

Both have got cracks and fissures but the oozing in Petroleum IS THIN AND WATERY but in Graphites it is STICKY AND TRANSPARENT (Kent).
General Modalities :

Aggravation: From carriage riding, before and during a thunderstorm, in winter and in dampness.

Amelioration: Skin symptoms are beter in summer, warm air, lying with head high and dry weather.

Relations :
One of our best antidotes for lead poisoning.
Complimentary: Sepia.
Antidotes: Nux vom., Cocc.

chapter: 161 PHOSPHORIC ACID

a ae

Glacial HAHNEMANN H3PO,
Phosphoric 

INTRODUCTION

Phosphoric acid is another of Hahnemann’s immortal legacies in Materia Medica Pura. He gives direction for its preparation and for its potentization upto the trillionth fold dilution. It is an invaluable remedy well deserving the name NERVE TONIC says Dr. Hughes in his Pharmacodynamics. Like all other acids, it has marked debility and prostration.

CLINICAL

Asthma, Brain-fag, Cough, Debility, Diabetes, Diarrhoea, Enteric fever, Flatulence, Gout, Headache, Locomotor ataxia, Mental weakness, Perspiration, Disorders of pregnancy, Rheumatism, Sexual organs, Spermatorrhoea, Urinary disorders, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on brain, nerves, blood, kidneys, mucous membrane, sex organs and bones.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces both mental and physical debility but the mental symptoms are first to develop. The remedy runs from mental to physical, from brain to muscles (In Muriatic acid, the muscular prostration comes first and the mind seems to be clear until long after the muscles are prostrated i.e. debility runs from body to mind). It also produces haemorrhage, digestive disorders and inflammation of bones.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: It is best suited to persons of originally strong constitution, who have become debilitated BY LOSS OF VITAL FLUIDS, sexual excess, violent acute diseases, chagrin or long succession of moral emotion, grief, care or disappointed affection. Pale sickly complexion, eyes sunken and surrounded by blue margins.

Temperament: Mild disposition and yielding temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasms: Psora, syphilis, sycosis are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Patients who were originally strong but have become debilitated due to LOSS OF VITAL FLUIDS, sexual excess, violent acute diseases, chagrin or    long continued mental emotions such as grief, care and disappointed love.
2. Patients with a mild and yielding disposition (Puls.).

3 Patient is LISTLESS, APATHETIC AND INDIFFERENT ¢o the affaris of his own life prostrated and stupefied with grief.

4. Patient trembles, legs are weak; so stumbles easily or makes mis-steps.

5. Due to the bad effects of onanism, the patient is greatly distressed by the culpability ofthe act (Staph).

6. Frequent, profuse, and debilitating emissions.

7. Chest feels weak from talking or coughing (Stannum) in phthisis or from loss ofvital fluids.

8. Pains in the back and limbs as if beaten. In children and young people who grow too rapidly, this remedy is well indicated.

9. Boring, drawing digging pains in nerves of extremities, necrosis, in stump afteramputations (Allium Cepa).

10. Painless and non-debilitating diarrhoea is a striking feature of this remedy.

11. Urine contains excessive phosphate. Profuse urination at night, of clear, watery urine


12. Desire for warm food, something refreshing, juicy things, milk and water Aversionto coition, coffee, wine, beer and alcohol.

13. Mind : Listless apathetic: Indifferent to the affairs of life, prostrated and stupefied with grief, indifferent to those things that used to      be of most interest, especially if there be debility and emaciation. Dility first affects mind then the body (opposite to Muriatic acid).         Weak memory,Ndifficult comprehension, incapacity to think and disinclination to talk. Weeping disposition. Abashed, sad, despiar of cure with     the history of loss of vital fluid. Low muttering delirium, unintelligible; lies in a stupor, unconscious of all that is going on around          him. Answers slowly but correctly. Low spirited and anxious about the future. Mental symptoms are due to bad news, disappointed love and loss     of vital fluids.

14. Ailments from : Bad news, grief, chagrin, sorrow,home sickness, disappointed love, loss of vital fluids, sexual excess, injury, shock     operation, overstudy, onanism, debility, acid drinks, rich food and fruits.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache is caused by grief, sorrow, LOSS OF VITAL FLUIDS, sexual excess, shock, bad news or exhausted nerve, eye strain, overuse of            eyes.

Phosphoric Acid 473

Location: Headache in occiput and vertex.

Sensation: Sensation of a crushing weight on vertex.

Character of Headache: Headache usually spreads forward from the back side. There is crushing weight on vertex. Headache of school girls from                        eye-strain or overuse of eyes; of students who growfast.
   
Modalities: Aggravation by least motion, noise especially music and relief from lying down (Bry.,Gels., Silicea.).

Diarrhoea :

Diarrhoea may arise as a result of fear or during cholera time, or from acids.

Character: It is painless and non-debilitating; white or yellow, watery, passes involuntarily with flatus.

Uro-genital system :

Causation: Diabetes melliuts or insipidus, sexual excess, onanism, shock, operation, etc.

Character of urine: Urine looks like milk, mixed with jelly-like bloody pieces, decomposes readily. There is profuse urination at night. The urine is clear, watery, but it forms a white cloud at once due to the presence of excessive phosphate caused by nerve waste. There is constant urging to urinate or involuntary urination. Few drops of white gleety discharge occur in the morning. For diabetes melitus of nervous orgin, Phosphoric acid can be employed as a successful remedy.

Onanism :

The patient is greatly, depressed by the culpability of the act. There are frequent and prof use emissions, several times in one night, even after coitus. It is very much debilitating. The patient is sad. abashed and despair of cure. This remedy may bring back hope in him.

Typhoid :

Phosphoric acid, is an excellent remedy for typhus or typhoid, showing peculiar characteristic symptoms.

Character of typhoid: Phosphoric acid, is usually indicated in the SECOND AND THIRD WEEK of typhoid.

There is COMPLETE APATHY AND INDIFFERENCE. The PATIENT IS LISTLESS. Indifferent to the affairs of life; completely prostrated and stupefied with grief, indifferent to those things that used to be of most interest to him.

The patient LIES LIKE A LOG; is insensible to happenings around him. He has stupid sleep from which he may be aroused in full conscious state. If questioned, he answers slowly and correctly and again falls into sleep.

The patient has muttering delirium; he is unintelligible; lies in a stuporous state or stupid sleep, utterly regardless of surroundings. The patient trembles,

There may be intestinal haemorrhage as well as bledding from the nose. The blood is dark, offensive and non-coagulable.

Meteoric distension of abdomen with a great deal of rumbling and gurgling. .

Along with typhoid, there may be diarrhoea too. Stool is watery, white grayish and painless.
Involuntary stool with great debility.

Tmperature of the body is not high but has constant sticky profuse sweat.

Weak and small pulse, frequent and intermitting. There is dryness of mouth,, throat; gray-white coating on the tongue with red streak in the middle.

Concomitants: Ecchymosis, bluish red spots on the parts on which the patient lies. Muttering delirium with dim sleepy eyes. Miliary rashes appear first upon neck and then on the back, chest and at last upon
the feet.

Modalities:
¢ Aggravation by exertion, talking and loss of vital fluid.

¢ Amelioration: From keeping warm and from warmth of bed.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From mental affections, loss of vital fluids especially seminal, self abuse, sexual excess, talking causes weakness in chest (Stannum).

Amelioration: By sitting, standing and warmth of bed.

Relations :

Phosphoric acid acts well before or after China in colliquative sweats, diarrhoea and debility.

After Nux. in fainting after a meal.


chapter:162 


PHOSPHORUS

Phosphorus HAHNEMANN The Element

INTRODUCTION

‘Phosphorus is one of our best proved and requently used drugs and besides this, it is a remedy of very definite characteristic symptoms.In Allen’s Encyclopaedia, it has no less than 3,920 recorded symptoms.

Hahnemann by using phosphorus in Homoeo Parmacy has proved the fact that potentised medicines are no longer subject to chemical laws.As we all know phosphorus in pure crude form, is highly cumbustible if exposed to air, hencedangerous, but when the same is potentised, it becomes one of the leading healers.

CLINICAL

Anaemia. Asthma, Bone diseases, Brain affection, Cancer, Catarrh, Constipation, Consumption,Cough, Diarrhoea, Dropsy, Ecchymosis, Enteric fever, Epilepsy, Exostosis, Eye affection, Epistaxis, Fatty degeneration, Flatulence, Gastritis, Haemorrhage, Headache, Heart affection, Jaundice, Liver affection, Locomotor ataxia, Marasmus, Menstrual disorders, Neuralgia, Numbness, Paralysis, Pneumona, Pregnancy—disorders of, Rheumatism, Rickets, Throat and lung affections, Ulcers, Vomiting, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Being one of the polychrest remedies, it acts practically on any and every tissue of the body, particulaly skin and mucous membrane, bones, blood, spinal cord, nerves, heart, liver, kidney, and lungs.

PATHOGENESIS»

It initiates inflammation and degeneration of mucous membranes irritates and inflames serous membranes, destroys spinal cord and nerves causing 
paralysis. It also destroys bones, especially of the lower jaw and tibia. Disorganises blood; causes fatty degeneration of heart and liver, with 
yellow atrophy of liver.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Phosphorus is best suited for tall, slender persons with narrow chest, who are good and beautiful to look at having fair, thin, transparent skin, delicate eyelashes, fine blond or brownish red hair. Young people who grow too rapidly and are inclined to stoop (walk stopped—Sulphur). Chlorotic anaemia at the time of puberty.

Temperament: Sanguine temperament, possessing quick perception and very sensitive nature; also having bilious, irritable temperament. Of course, this drug has a lympthatic temperament too.

Relation with heat and cold : Though a chilly patient, its head and stomach crave cold, cold application, cold food and COLD DRINKS.

Miasm: Being one of the leading members of the polychrest remedies, it has symptoms of all the three miasms, psora being the basic soil.

Diathesis:

A. Tubercular diathesis : Patient is susceptible to cold. Great liability to catch cold, enlarged neck glands (scrofula), flat chest, wrinkled, old looking face, with sunken eyes and pointed nose, craves meat and potatoes; family history may have tuberculosis. eh

B. Phosphorus also has HAEMORRHAGIC DIATHESIS. Wounds bleed very much even if very small; wounds that appear to have healed, break open again. The character of the blood is BRIGHT RED, WATERY AND NON-COAGULABLE— intermittent flow, ecchymosis with purpuric spots. Acute haemorrhage rather than chronic, calls for this great remedy.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS ; medo

1. Burning is a great key-note of this drug. It is one of the TRIO of norners of Nash, others being ARSENIC and SULPHUR. Burning is almost, as strong under this remedy as under Arsenic and Sulphur. Burning anywhero and everywhere all over the body. There is no organ or tissue in which it may not be found, from the outer skin to the innermost surface of every tract of its parenchyma. Burning with or without rise of temperature, but with functional and/or organic changes (Malignant). Burning in spots along the spine between the scapulae, of palm and hands, in chest,
lungs etc.

2. A weak emtpty all gone sensation in head, chest, stomach and entire abdomen.

3. Craving cold things (Ver. alb.), ice-cream which agrees; cold water which is thrown up as soon as it gets warm in the stomach (Cormpare, Bismuth and Arsenic); acids, refreshing things wine sour things, salts and fatty food. Aversion to tobacco, sweets, tea, pudding, coffnd beer.

4. Oversensitiveness of all senses runs through the remedy. Do not forget to think of Phosphorus in patients who are greatly susceptible to external impression—light, noise, odour, touch electric changes, thunderstorms, etc. (least sensitive, Opium, Capsicum, Carbo veg) —

5. Dandruff; hair falls out in bunches, Baldness of single spots.

6. Disinclination to both mental and physical exertion even to study or to converse.

7. Restlessness is yet another characteristic, Patient moves continuously. Cannot stand still for a moment, with CONSTANT FIDGETY FEELING ALL OVER BODY

Zincum met., Med., Merc. sol.), especially in evening, at twilight and when lying on left side. Restlessness with anxiety (Aconite, Ars., Rhus. tox.).

Most of the complaints are aggravated when lying on left side—restlessness, cough, pain, etc.

Vicarious menstruation. Epistaxis instead of menses (Bry.).

Increased sexual appetite, even leading the patient to mania followed by impotency. Perspiration of Phosphorus smells like Sulphur.

Swelling of both the eye lids. (Upper eye lid—Kalli. c., Lower eye lid—Apis).

During pregnancy, unable to drink water, sight of it causes nausea and vomiting. Must close her eyes while bathing.

Mind : The patient is very much apathetic and indifferent to friends and surroundings (Phos. acid.. China), even to his own children (Sepia), unwilling to talk, thinks slowly, moves sluggishly.

Weary of life, full of gloomy forebodings (Psorinum).

Patient is quite intelligent, but physically weak (Lyco., Tuberculmum). There is great fear in darkness (Calc.carb.).

Fear of death when alone. 6 Fear of thunderstorm Suspects as if something was creeping out from every corner of the house. Oversensitive to external impressions light, noise, touch, odour, etc. Insanity with an exaggerated idea of one’s own importance (Platina).

The patient wants to be magnetised (Calcarea carb., Silicea).

Ailments from : Mental exertion, strong emotion, strong odours, gas vapours, thunderstorm, lightning, sexual excess, loss of vital fluids, sprains, wounds, lifting, exposure to drenching rain (Rhus tox., Dulcamara, Gels.), tobacco (Camphor, Ignatia), by wahsing clothes (Sepia), having hair cut (Bell., Glonoine); excessive use of table salt, etc.

PARTICULARS

Hoarseness :

Aphonia, larynx is very painful. Clergy man’s sore throat; violent tickling in larynx with rawness, cannot talk on account of pain in the larynx.

In Aphonia, when Phos. (Acon., Spongia) fails Cina should be thought of.

Hoarseness is worse in the evening while talking, laughing, reading, cold air, etc.

Cough :
Side: Left side of the chest is usually affected.

Sensation: As if some weight is lying on the chest.

Character of cough: Hard, dry, tight cough, with congestion of lung.

Character of sputa: Sputa is rusty, blood coloured, or purulent.

Character of pain: Sharp stitching pain in the chest, respiration quick, whole body trembles while coughing.

Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: By lying on left side, and from cold air.
* Amelioration: By lying on right-side.

Pneumonia :
Stage: Usually Phosphorus is indicated in the hepatisation stage of the disease.

Location: Affects the upper lobe of the left lung.

Sensation: Heaviness on the chest, as if some weight is lying with tightness on the chest, burning sensation in the chest. Dryness of the air passage, especially in the upper chest.

Character of cough: Dry tickling hard cough; irritation of larynx excites cough.

Character of sputa: Sputa is rusty, blood coloured or purulent.

Character of pain: While coughing, there is stitching pain in the chest (Bry., Kali carb.).

Modalities:
* Aggravation: By lying on left side or painful side; when going from warm room to cold (rev. of Bry.); from talking, laughing, reading and  towards evening.”

¢ Amelioration: By lying on right side.

Concomitants: Desire for cold, refreshing drink.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Stomach : Empty all-gone sensation in stomach. The patient craves cold food and drink, icy- cold, refreshing, juicy things; ice-cream relieves              the gastric pain. Great burning in stomach which is better by cold food and drink, but as soon as water becomes warm in stomach, it is             thrown up in the form or vomiting. Sometimes there may be VOMITING OF BRIGHT RED BLOOD.

Constipation : Stool is slender, long, dry, tough and hard. Dog like stool, voided with great difficulty and straining (Causticum).

Diarrhoea :
* Causation: As soon as anything enters into the rectum.

© Time: In the morning.

© Character of stool: Profuse, watery stool, pouring away as from a hydrant, involuntary stool with sago-like particles. SENSATION AS IF THE ANUS REMAINS WIDE OPEN (Apis, Secale cor.).

Liver : In cirrhosis of liver due to excessive indulgence, after strong liquors; fatty degeneration of the liver; with malignant jaundice with sharp cutting pain in the liver, accompanied by nausea and vomiting.

Modality: Relieved by cold food and cold drink but as soon as becomes warm in stomach, it is thrown up.

Haemorrhage :

Phosphorus is a great anti-haemorrhagic drug. Haemorrhage is caused by degeneration of tissue and occurs from small injuries or cut.

Phosphorus 

Character of blood: Profuse, watery, bright-red blood which is non-coagulable. Bleeding from various organs and parts of the body. Small wounds bleed much. Pours out freely and then ceases suddenly for a time, seen as in metrorrhagia, haemoptysis, haematemesis, from nose, stomach, anus, etc.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Evening and before mid-night (Puls., Rhus tox.), Lying on left or painful side, during a thunderstorm, any change of weather and extremes of temperature.

Amelioration: Lying on right side, from being rubbed or magnetised, from cold water, cold food (until it gets warm) and in darkness.

Note : Cold air relieves the head and face symptoms, but aggavates those of chest, throat and neck.

Relations :

Complementary to: Arsenic.

Incompatible to: Causticum i.e. must not be used before or after.

Follows well: After Calcarea and China. Vegetable analogue: Cepa.

Key-note remark : Hahnemann says: “Acts most beneficially when patient suffers from chronic loose stool or diarrhoea”.



chapter : 163

PHYSOSTIGMA

Calabar Bean Legumenosae

INTRODUCTION

This remedy has very limited use in our homoeopathic practice. The Chief field of its action is spinal motor nerves, eyes, and muscles.
It stimulates heart’s action, as raises blood pressure and causes increased peristalsis. It also cures contraction of the pupils and of the ciliary muscles.

CLINICAL

Astigmatism. Eyes-affection of, injuries of, strains of. Glaucoma. Myopia. Paralysis Agitans, Spinal irritation. Tetanus.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Cannot stop thinking.

2) Uncommon mental activity.

3) Contraction of pupils.

4) Spasm of cilliary muscle with irritability after using eyes.

5) Floating black spots and flushing of light before eyes.

6) Twitching of lids and ocular muscles.

7) Impaired locomotion with great prostration of muscular system.

8) Tremors or trembling of young persons from mental or physical disturbances.

9) Tetanus : Idiopathic or traumatic; brought on or aggra-vated fay slightest breath of air from persons passing

10) Mind : Patient is irritable, nervous and cannot remember any thing. There is uncommon mental activity. He cannot stop thinking with inability           to concentrate the mind.

11) Ailments from : Emotion, grief, bathing, injuries, blows.

GENERAL MODALITIES :

Aggravation ; From straining the eyes, from walking during night. Amelioration : From warmth and in warm room.

Relations : Compare;Bell., Con., Cur., Gels., Hyper., Strych.

Physostigma 

PARTICULARS

Head :

There is constant pain on the top of head. Vertigo with constrictive feeling of head. Pain in supraorbital region. Cannot bear to raise eyelids. Cerebrospinal meningitis.

Eyes :

Pain after using eyes; floating black Spots, flashes of lights, twitching of lids and muscles of eyes (Agar). Nystagmus (rev. of Bothrops) Photophobia; Contraction of pupils; twitching of ocular muscles. Muscae Volitantes; flashes of light; partial blindness. Glaucoma; paresis of accommodation; astigmatism. Spasm of ciliary muscle, with irritability after using eyes. Increasing myopia. Postdiphtheritic paralysis of eye and accommodation of muscles.

Heart:
Feeble pulse; palpitation; spasmodic action, with feeling of pulsation through the whole body. Beats of heart distinctly perceptible in chest and head. Fluttering of heart felt in throat. Fatty degeneration.

Extremities

Pain in right popliteal space. Numbness of hands & feet. Sudden Jerking of limbs on going to sleep. Numbness in paralysed parts, crampy pains in limbs. Locomotor ataxia

chapter : 164  

PHYTOLACCA DECANDRA

Poke Root ALLENTOWN COLLEGE Phytolaccaceae
ns SS

INTRODUCTION

It is always a red-letter day when one makes friendship with a new drug. For drug friendship, one needs to recognise its character and possibilities, to be able to realise the reactions and the response it can produce on human beings. Phytolacca is one of our powerful and promptly acting remedies, says Tyler. We can get the most useful data in regard to this drug FROM HALE’S NEW REMEDIES. Like Baptisia, Gelsemium, Caulophyllum and others, Phytolacca too comes to us from America by observation of the domestic or native practices, but they have been rendered very useful as therapeutic tools in precise indication, obtained by proving on healthy human beings. ‘ According to Kent, Phytolacca can be named as “VEGETABLE MERCURY” like Podo and Mezerium.

CLINICAL

Asthma, Angina pectoris, Boils, Bone affection, Breast affection, Cancer, Cicatrices, Constipation, Cough, Diptheria, Eye troubles, Gonorrhoea, Glandular affection, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Respiratory troubles, Sciatia, Syphilis, Ulcers, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Phytolacca acts chiefly upon the glandular system, particularly on the throat and mammary glands. It also affects the serous, fibrous and mucous tissues.



PATHOGENESIS

It causes inflammation and irritation of the serous, fibrous, and mucus tissues, skin and periosteum. On the glandular system, it causes tendency to ulceration.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Emaciated patient, chlorbtic with loss of fat. Face sunken, pale, hippocratic, blue rings around the eyes with yellow complexion. Great exhaustion and profound prostration. Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient. phytolacca Decandra in


Miasm: Syphilitic and sycotic.

Diathesis: Rheumatic and gouty diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Pains flying like electric shocks, rapidly shifting, shooting, lancinating, worse frommotion and at night.

. Right sided affections e.g., shoulders, throat, etc.

. Chilly patient, worse from cold, damp, rainy weather, relieved by warm application.

. All the symptoms are worse at night.ao fF WO WN

. There is intense backache and headache, and a sore aching, bruised feeling all over accompanied by restlessness and prostration.

. Irresistible desire to bite the teeth or gums together during dentition (Podo.).

. Burning in throat as from coal of fire or red hot iron. Cannot drink hot liquid.

. Uvula is enlarged, dropsical, oedematous, almost translucent (Kali bich., Rhus tox.).

. Breast sensitive, sore, and fissured. Pain radiates from nipple to all over the body,

(Pain goes from nipple to back—Croton tig. Pain goes from nipple to uterus, Pulsatilla and Silicea).

10. Breast shows an early tendency to cake; HARD AND PAINFUL.

11. Ulcers are angry looking, red, congested, gaping ulcers with ichorous, unhealthy and foetid discharge.

12. Aggravation from hot fluid and hot application.

13. Ailments from : Abuse of mercury and sypilitic affections.

PARTICULARS

Glandular symptoms :

Phytolacca is pre-eminently a glandular remedy, There is glandular swelling with heat and inflammation, especially of the neck, particularly the submaxillary and parotid glands which are very much HARDENED LIKE STONE. The mammary glands are also ENLARGED WITH SORE FEELING. It has got ability to delay the formation of malignant growth especially in the breast:

Breast :

The main centre of action is mammary glands. Almost any and every excitement is concentrated on the mammary gland. NO OTHER DRUG IN OUR MATERIA MEDICA HAS SO MUCH CONCENTRATION ON MAMMARY GLAND AS PHYTOLACCA.

There is mastitis with enlaged auxiliary glands. The look of the mammae is of a purple hue. The mammae are full of HARD AND PAINFUL NODOSITIES. Cancer of breast, which shows an early tendency to cake. IT IS FULL STONY HARD AND VERY MUCH PAINFUL. Irritable breast before and during menses.
There is a tumefaction of the breast which neither heals nor suppurates. Mammary abscesses, angry ulcers from which a sanious, ichorous, foetid pus comes out.The nipple is very much SENSITIVE, SORE, FISSURED and is aggravated by nursing. Whenever the child nurses, the pain goes from nipple to all over the body (Goes to back, Croton tig.: to Uterus, Puls., Sil.). When there is no milk in the breast or milk is scanty, thick, unhealthy and dries up soon then Phytolacca is the only remedy (Kent).


Throat :

Phytolacca is a wonderful medicine for Tonsillitis and Diptheria when the following symptoms are
present :-

Sensation: Sensation of a lump in the throat.

Look of the throat: Dark, red, ash-coloured appearance of the throat.

Character of pain: Great pain at the root of the tongue, pain shoots from throat into ears on swallowing. Pain flies like electric shocks, shifting in nature. Tonsils are swollen and ulcerated. Sore throat. In diphtheria, the throat feels very hot; there is great burning as from coal of fire ORA RED HOT IRON. Uvula enlarged, dropsical, almost translucent.

There is irresistible desire to swallow with severe burning pain. Cannot swallow even water; difficulty in swallowing anything.

Modalities:
© Aggravation: Drinking hot fluids and at night.
¢ Amelioration: By cold drinks.

Rheumatism :
Syphilitic or mercurial in origin.
Location: Especially right shoulder.
Sensation: Stiffness in arm with inability to raise the arm.

Character of pain: Pains flying like electric shocks, shooting, lancinating from one place to another. There is also pain under the side of thighs. Sharp cutting pain in the hips, legs drawn up. Cannot touch the floor, syphilitic and gonorrhoeal background.

Modality; Aggravation: From motion, at night, from warmth of bed and warm application. It occupies a position in between Bryonia and Rhus tox. and cures when these fail.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: When it rains, exposure to damp cold weather, motion, at night and right side.

Amelioration: Warmth, dry weather and rest.

Relations :

Inimical: Mercurius.

Antidotes: Milk and salt; Bell.


chapter: 165


PICRIC ACID

a
Trinitrophenol T.F. ALLEN C,M,(NO,)OM
I ee

INTRODUCTION

It exists as bright yellow glistening crystal. It has sour odour, but it has a very bitter taste. It is one of the important medicines for diseases of spinal origin.

CLINICAL

Anaemia. Boils. Brainfag. Burns. Debility. Headache. Lumbago. Myelitis. Neurasthania. Paralysis. Priapism. Self-abuse. Spinal diseases. Writers’ Cramp.

SPHERE OF ACTION AND PATHOGENESIS

It causes degeneration of spinal cord with paralysis. It produces a fair picture of “Nervous frustration”. Has also action on blood, genito-urinary system and skin.

CONSTITUTION
Make up suited to dark complexioned persons with dirty appearance about knuckles; anaemic, cachetic persons, worn out persons, who are overtaxed mentally and physically. Relation with heat & cold : The patient is better by cold air and cold water. Miasms : Psoric, Sycotic & Syphilitic.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Progressive weariness from a slight feeling of fatigue on motion to complete paralysis.

2) Like all acids, profound weakness and debility run through the whole drug.

3) Burning along spine and great weakness of spine and back, softening of cord (Phos., Zinc).

4) Brain fag : Of literary or business people. Slightest excite-ment, mental exertion or over work brings on headache and causes burning along the spine (Kali Phos.)

5) Headache : Of students, teachers and overworked busi-nessmen, from grief or depressing emotions, occipito-cervical region.Might bandaging (Bell., Arg. Nit.)

6) Heaviness, numbness, formication, and weakness are the words which are the keynotes of this drug.

7) Priapism, with spinal disease there is violent & long last-ing erection. Penis is painfully distended. Great sexual desire with emissions leading to impotency.

8) Small painful boils—especially in external auditory meatus; also in other parts of the body. (Calc. Pic., Garb. Acid)

9) Dr. Thery of Paris recommends Pic. Acid very highly for burns of the first and second degree.

10) It is also a medicine for progressive pernicions anaemia.

11) Ailments from—Fatigue, mental exertion, study, grief or depressing emotions & sexual abuse.

12) Worse from least mental exertion or least study, motion, wet weather, and better from cold air and cold water are the characteristic     modalities.

PARTICULARS

Mind
Brainfag of literary or business people. Slightest excitment, mental exertion on overwork brings on headache and burning along spine. Lack of will-power. Disinclined to work. Dementia with prostration, Sits still & listless.

Extremities

Great weakness. Tired heavy feeling all over body, especially of limbs. Worse exertion. Weariness, progressing from a slight feeling of fatigue on motion to complete paralysis. Acute ascending paralysis. Burning along spine and great weakness of spine & back, softening of cord.

General Modalities

Amelioration : From cold air and cold water.

Aggravation : Least mental exertion; motion; study; wet weather.


chapter : 166 PLATINA


Platinum STAPF The metal



INTRODUCTION

Platinum, the costliest and the heaviest metal in the mineral kingdom, is nick-named by some authors as the “BLACK” LETTER MEDICINE” meaning thereby that the drug has occupied its place in pur pharmacopoeia by causing (in proving) and by curing (in homoeopathic preparation) maladies especially mental or those connected with perverted mental conditions. The curious thing in Platina, is thatthis mental subconscious state extends outwards into the physical sphere.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Constipation, Convulsion, Delusion, Genital organs, Hysteria, Headache, Labour, Melancholia, Menstrual disorders, Neuraliga, Numbness, Rheumatism, Vag-inismus, etc.


SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts especially upon the nerve centres depressing the sensorium and producing a general tendency to anaesthesia, paralysis, etc, manifested especially in women.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes the derangement of sexual health producing a hysterial condition, melancholia and menstrual disorders.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: It is pre-eminently a WOMAN’S REMEDY and especially sutited to women of dark hair, dark complexion, having rigid muscular fibres, who suffer from too early and too profuse menses.

Temperament: Hysterical and sanguine temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient.
meet PaMEN

Miasm: Psora is in the backgound.

CUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Sexual organs are exceedingly sensitive, cannot even bear the cloth or napkin to touch the private parts; will go into spasm from an examination; vulva is very painfully sensitive during coitus; will faint during coitus or cannot endure it.

2. The cramping pain causes numbness and tingling in the parts. The pain increases gradually to an acme and then gradually declines (Stannum,    Syphilinum).

3. Nymphomania: Aggravates in lying-in women; excessive sexual development, especially in virgins; vaginismus, spasm and constriction.

4, Mental symptoms appear as physical symtpoms disappear and vice versa.

5. Constipation while travelling, after lead poisoning or from inertia of bowels. There is frequent unsuccessful urging; stool adheres to rectum    and anus like soft clay (Alum.). Constipation when Nux fails (When Platina fails Plumbum comes in).
6. “Superioirty complex” is of the highest degree in Platina.

7. Mind : Causation: Mental disturbances after fright, grief, vexation, onanism and pride, especially in hysterical women who are suffering from uterine troubles. One of the most characteristic mental symptoms of this drug is PRIDE AND OVER ESTIMATION OF ONE’S SELF. She imagins that she belongs to and ‘is born in a high family and all others are of lower category. “Superiority complex” of the highest degree runs through the whole remedy. She looks down upon others with contemptuous eyes and thinks everyone else is very much inferior to her. There is mental delusion as if everyone and everything is inferior to herself. All persons physically and mentally are smaller than her, and that she is large and superior to all others She imagines that all about her are second to none and there is sensation of herself growing larger in every direction There are HYSTERICAL PATIENTS, who are alternately gay and sad. One moment excessively happy and the next moment sad and gloomy (Crocus sat., Puls., Ign.,
Nux mos.). Can cry easily any moment. Such ladies are very much arrogant, proud and naughty. There is satiety of life with taciturnity and fear of death. Trifling things produce profound vexation. Anxious and serious over silly matters (Anacardium, Baryta carb.). There is fear of death, with loathing of life. Fears that something serious will happen to her.,Trembling of all the limbs during even a little exertion. “Mental symptoms appear as physical symptoms disappear and vice versa” is the  most rare, uncommon and characteristic sympiom of this drug.

8. Ailments from : Fright, grief, vexation, onanism, pride, sexual excess and masturbation.


Platina 

plating

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation: From anger, chargin, uterine diseases, fright, vexation, sexual excess, masturbation, etc.

Location: Headache may be in the temple, in the top of the head or in the forehead.

Sensation: Sensation of numbness in head.

Character of pain: Pain comes gradually and goes gradually (Stannum, Syphilinum), attended with numbness of parts, (Cham., Acon.). There is pressing pain in the head. Tension in the scalp. There is cramp-like constriction of the scalp. Also there is squeezing sensation in the head.

Modalities: Aggravation: in the evening, inside a room, and ameliortion from motion and in open air.
Menses :

This remedy is ideally suited in the case of METRORRHAGIA AND MENORRHAGIA Time: Too early.

Quantity: Too profuse.

Duration: Too long lasting.

Character of blood: Dark clotted, flows in black spasm with pain in the uterus with twitching. Pain comes gradually and goes away gradually with numbness of the pelvic region. The menstrual periods sometimes return every fourteen days.

Concomitants : In hysterical ladies, where PRIDE predominates.
Labour :

The parts are very much sensitive to touch. During laour the contractions are interrupted by sensitiveness of vagina and the internal parts. It is impossible for the physician to make the usual examination.

Genital symptoms :

Genital organs are exceedingly sensitive. She cannot bear even the napkin to touch her private parts. She will go into spasm from an examination. There issexual erethysm which isone of the most prominent features of the Platina lady.

There is great nymphomania, especially in a lying in woman, with excessive sexual development in virgins. There is vaginismus with spasm and constriction, although there is unusual sexual excirment and voluptuous crawling in the genitals. Such extreme sensitiveness of the sexual organs make the woman not to wear the pads during menstruation. Vulva is very much painful. It, is not due to any inflammation, but due to HYPERAESTHESIA AND SENSITIVENESS. Therefore, she cannot endure coitus. If coition is attempted; she faints during the act.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Abdomen : Colicky pain in the abdomen. Painter’s colic. Pain in, the ubmilical region extending through the back.

Pressing and bearing down sensation.

There is much flatulence and fermentation.On the external surface of abdomen, there is great tension of the skin with violent cramping pain.
Drawing pain in the navel as if they are drawn by a string which causes a sensation of retraction of abdomen. The pain comes gradually and goes off gradually accompanied by numbness.

Constipation :

* Causation: After lead poisoning from interia of bowels.

© Character of stool; The stool is very much hard as if burnt. There is frequent urging to stool and inability to strain a stool. Stool may be of soft, clay coloured, which adheres to the rectum and anus (Alumina). Bad type of constipation; after Nux fails.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: Sitting, standing and in the evening.
Amelioration: By walking in the open air.
Relations :

Compare: Plumbum.

Antidotes: Puls., also bad effects of lead. scence is


chapter : 167

PLUMBUM

Lead HARTLAUB Pb, The Metal

INTRODUCTION

Plumbum has been proved by Hering and three other eminent doctors. The metal “LEAD” is used as one of the constituents of paints. Hence symptoms of gradual lead poisoning are commonly met with amongst the painters. Compilation of our Materia Medica is greatly helped by the careful and scientific observation of symptoms brought about by the inadvertent use of the poisonous doses, especially amongst the painters. In the old school, metallic lead was seldom used, being considered as inert, but Boehave gave it internally after reducing it to an impalpable powder for leucorrhoea, dysentery, syphilis and gout. In Homoeopathy, it is used only if the drug fulfils the law of Similia-in relation to the disease.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Anaemia, Asthma, Atrophy, Bone diseases, Brain troubles, Bright’s disease, Colic, Constipation, Epilepsy, Eye troubles, Fevers, Gout, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Hernia, Intestinal obstruction, Jaundice, Kidney affection, Liver troubles, Muscular atrophy, Paralysis, Respiratory toubles, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Plumbum acts especially upon the nervous system i.e., on spinal nerve centres. The blood and the ailmentary system are also the special seats of action of this drug.
PATHOGENESIS

It irritates the spinal nerve centre causing increased sensibility, neuralgic spasm, Paralysis cheifly of extensors, especially of forearm, or upper limbs with partial anaesthesia or excessive hyperaesthesia. Haematosis is interfered with. Rapid reduction in the number of R.B.C. and pallor, icterus, anaemia, etc. frequently occur.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Excessive and rapid emaciation, with extreme weakness and anaemia. The look of the face is greasy, shiny, pale yellow and hippocratic. Cheeks are sunken, expressive of great anxiety and suffering.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.
Miasm: Syphilis is in the background.


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

.“Retraction” and sense of retraction is the key note of plumbum, e.g. retraction of abdominal wall during colic, atrophy of muscles, during paralysis, etc.
.Violent colic, sensation as if the abdominal wall was drawn by a string to the spine.
. Distinct blue line along the margin of gums, gums swollen pale and show a lead coloured line.
. Constipation after lead poisoning: stool hard lumpy black like sheep dung (Chel., Opium).
. Excessiue hyperaesthesia—could not bear to be touched anywhere, it hurts so.
. Again, ANAESTHESIA is also strongly present in plumbum like hyperaesthesia.
. Excessive and rapid emaciation with general or partial paralysis, especially of single

muscles.

. Muscular atrophy from sclerosis of the spinal nervous system.
. Complexion is pale, ash-coloured, yellow, cheecks are sunken, expression of great anxiety and sufferng.
Excessive pain in the abdomen, radiating to all parts of the body.

Intussusception with colic and faecal vomiting strangulated hernia, femoral., inguinal or umbilical.

. The symptoms are aggravated by touch and motion and relieved by hard pressure

and by rubbing.

Mind : Great mental depression with slow perception. The mind is impaired, loss of
memory; the patient memorizes with difficulty, comprehension is difficult. He cannot recall words to express himself. The operation of mind is slow. Apart from the slowness of mind which is a general symptom, this remedy is full of melancholia, sadness, feeling as if something terrible would happen.

All the mental symptoms are greatly exaggerated by exertion, especially exertion in the open air.

Ailments from : Sexual excess, suppressed eruption and bad effects of mercury.

PARTICULARS

Mouth :

There is distinct blue line along the margin of the gums, gums pale, swollen, shows a lead

coloured line, blue purple or brown and painful.

The tongue is dry, brown, cracked, coated yellow or green. There is foetid breath with dryness of mouth.

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Stomach : The stomach is unable to digest food, contracture of stomach with pressure and tightness, gastralgia with constant vomiting; solid cannot be swallowed.

Colic : Painter’s colic after lead poisoning. Many patients cannot sleep in a newly painted room.
They come down with lead colic or the acute affections of lead. Many people are very sensitive to lead.

¢ Location: Colic emanating from the central point in and around in and around the navel and radiating to all parts of the body.

¢ Sensation: Sensation AS IF ABDOMINAL WALL WAS DRAWN BY A STRING TO THE SPINE.

¢ Character of pain: The pain is of neuralgic type and spasmodic in character. It is sharp, constantly becoming acute by paroxysms.

The patient feels that some one is twisting and clawing at his intestines and this pain from the region of the navel radiates upward to the chest and down-ward to the pubes.

There is violent colic with excessive pain in abdomen. Sensitiveness in abdomen at night which causes the patient to stretch violently for hours; much stretch in every direction.

There may be intussusception with strangulated, femoral, inguinal or unbilical hernia with colic. There may be vomiting oflaecal matter.

Delirium alternates with colic.
Modalities:

e Aggravation: By motion, by touch, towards evening and night.

¢ Amelioration: Temporary relief from hard pressure and rubbing.
Concomitants: The colic is almost always accompanied by obstinate constipation.
Constipation :

© Causation: Due to paresis of the intestines or from irnpaction of faeces.

© Time: Usually during pregnancy.

© Character of stool: Stool is hard, lumpy, black like sheep-dung (Chel., Op.) with great urging |
for stop]. There is obstructed evacuation from impaction of faeces: with dryness of excretion.

Plumbum should be thought of when Platina fails.
Paralysis :
Plumbum is a good PARALYSES. It is adapted to diseases of the spinal orgin.

Causation: Paralysis originates from over exertion of the extensor muscles as in piano players, muscular atrophy, from sclerosis of spinal system.

Location: Paralysis of single muscle or group of muscles, especially of extensors.
Symptoms of paralysis; Muscular atrophy from sclerosis of spinal cord.
Paralysis of single muscle or a group of muscles especially extensors.

Cannot raise or lift anything with the hand.
Excessive and rapid emaciation of the affected parts.
Paralysis with hyperaesthesia followed by anaesthesia.
Paralysis with cramping pain.

general Modalities :
Aggravation: At night and from motion.
Amelioration: By rubbing, hard pressure and physical exertion.

Relations :
Bad effects of Plumbum are antidoted by Alumina, Platina, Zincum met. and Sulphuric acid.

Compare: Alumina, Platina and Opium in colic.


chapter : 168
PODOPHYLLUM

Sn
May Apple JEANES Berberidaceae
Wild lemon

INTRODUCTION

Podophyllum grows throughout the United States in damp, sheddy places in wood. It has leaves having 5 to 9 lobes, large white flowers
with fruits like small lemon; hence the plant is sometimes called wild lemon. Indian tribes use the roots to expel worms and also drop the juice
of the root into the ear to cure deafness. In Homoeopathy it has been introduced by our Master, with its reputation as the VEGETABLE MERCURY.

CLINICAL

Acidity, Anus—prolapse of, Asthma, Bilious attack, Constipation, Cholera infantum, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Dyspepsia, Female genital organs, Fever, Flatulence, Gallstone, Headache, Jaundice, Liver affection, Tenesmus, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts especially upon the liver and digestive tract, has particular affinity to the mucous membrane, more especially of the duodenum, rectum and glandular structure.
PATHOGENESIS

It produces irritation and excessive secretion with a characteristic jelly-like mucus from the intestine. Acting on the liver, it causes torpidity of liver jaundice, portal engorgement with tendency to haemorrhoids and fulness of the superficial veins.

CONSTITUTION
Physical make-up: Adapted to persons who suffer from gastro-intestinal derangements, especially after abuse of mercury.
Children who suffer from diarrhoea during the time of dentition in hot weather.

Temperament: Bilious temperament.
Relation with heat and cold: Affected by extremes of heat and cold.
Miasm: Psora and syphilis are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It is pre eminently a right sided remedy e.g. right throat right ovary, right hypochondrium, etc.
2. The patient constantly rubs and shakes the liver region with hands.
3. Fever paroxysm comes at 7 a.m. with great loquacity during chill and heat, but sleep during sweat stage.
4, Headache alternates with diarrhoea; headache in winter and diarrhoea in summer.
5. Painless cholera morbus and cholera infantum.
6. Diarrhoea of long standing, early in the morning. The diarrhoea of Podo. is characterised by ‘P’s e.g., PROFUSE, PAINLESS, PUTRID,    POLYCHROMATIC, PROLAPSE OF RECTUM AND PROSTRATION.
7. Diarrhoea of children during the time of dentition, in hot summer weather.
8. Thirst for large quantity of cold water, with foul tongue having imprint of teeth.
9. Prolapse of uterus from over-lifting and straining.
10. In early months of pregnancy, can lie comfortably only on abdomen.
11. Depression of spirits, imagines he is going to die or that he is very ill; disgust for life.
12. Desires to press gums together during dentition; aversion to food.
13. Ailments from : Abuse of mercury, over-lifting or over-stretching, summer (diarrhoea), dentition.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
It is indicated in chronic sick headache.
Time: Periodic headache.
Sensation: As if the head would burst:

Character: Congestive type of headache, as if all the blood has rushed towards the head. Bursting type of headache especially on the back of the head.

Modality: Worse in the morning and in hot weather.

Concomitants: Headache alternates with diarrhoea; headache in winter and diarrhoea in summer.

Abdomen :
Distended abdomen,

Liver region is very painful. The patient constantly rubs and shakes the region of liver with hands. Sensation of weakness and sinking in abdomen, Rumbling and shifting of flatus in abdomen with nausea and vomiting.

There is thirst for large quantity of cold water (Bry).
Constipation :

Clay-coloured stool, very much dry, hard vioded with great difficulty. Constipation of bottle fed babies with dry crumbling stool (Alumina).

There is piles from constipation, with prolapse ani.
Concomitants: Constipation alternates with diarrhoea.

Diarrhoea :
Causation: Diarrhoea after eating fruits, summer and during dentition.

Time: Diarrhoea begins early in the morning, continues till the forenoon and. is followed by natural stool in the evening.

Sensation: This diarrhoea is accompanied by a sensation of weakness or sinking in the abdomen or rectum.

Before stool: Loud gurgling in the abdomen with gripping colic Great weakness in the abdomen (Aloe, after stool).

During stool: Great heat and pajn in the anus with prolapsus ani.
After stool: There is great weakness and exhaustion.

Character of stool: It is PAINLESS, PROFUSE. PUTRID, POLYCHROMATIC (multi-coloured),
PROLAPSUS ANI with stool which GUSHES OUT (Crot. tig., Thuja).

The stool may be chalk-like, jelly-like undigested with yellow meal-like sediment.

There may be prolapse of rectum with stool.

Modality: Aggravation: In early morning, while bathing, in hot summer weather, after taking acidic fruits and drinks.

Concomitants: Headache altetnates with diarrhoea. Child presses the gums together, always nibs
the liver region with hands and there is thirst for large quantity of cold water.
Liver :

Podophyllum is pre-eminently a liver remedy especially in jaundice and chronic hepatitis.

There is dull aching pain in the liver region.

Sensation: Great fulness, soreness with stitching pain in the epigastrium; worse from coughing.

Character of pain: Acute burning pain in liver region. There is -our regurgitation of food with sour and acid eructation, heart-burn, nausea and profuse bilious vomiting and diarrhoea. There is bitter taste in mouth.

Modalities: Better: by rubbing and shaking the liver region. Aggravation at night.

Cholera :
Podophyllum is indicated in cholera infantum and cholera morbus.
Time: In the later part of night, especially about 3-4 a.m.

Character of stool; Painless cholera morbus with profuse diarrhoea and vomitting. The stool is Watery, profuse, offensive, and jelly-like.

Diarrhoea preceded by gripping colic. Profuse vomiting is another characteristic.
During cholera, there is violent cramp in feet, calf muscles and thigh.

After the attack, there is great prostration and exhaustion. The tongue is large, flabby with imprint of teeth,

There is thrist for large quantity of cold water.

Modality: Aggravation: after eating and drinking.

Female Genital Organs :

Podophyllum is especially suited in prolapse of uterus with sub-involution.

Causation: From over-lifting or straining, from constipation and after parturition.

Location: Pain in uterus and right ovary.

Sensation: Dragging down sensation in the region of ovary.

Character of pain: Pain with numbness in right ovary, running down to thigh. The uterus is extremely sore to touch, even the touch of light clothing is unbearable. In early months of pregnancy, the patient can lie comfortably only on abdomen.

Fever :

Podophyllum is generally useful in intermittent fever.

Time: Fever paroxysms come at 7 a.m.

With fever, there is pain in the hypochondrium, knees, ankles and wrists.

There is great loquacity during fever; the patient goes on talking especially during chill and heat
stage.The patient sleeps during the sweat stage. The sweat is profuse and offensive.

The tongue is moist, large and flabby with much salivation and great thirst for large quantity of cold water.

General Modalites :

Aggravation: In the early morning, in hot weather and during dentition.

Relations :
It antidotes: The bad effects of Mercury, Comphor, Aloe, Chelidonium, Nux vomica and Sulphur.
chapter : 169

PSORINUM

De  — ———————Ee
A product of psora HERING A Nosode
OE EEE Ss

INTRODUCTION

Psorinum is one of the greatest anti-psoric polychrest constitutional remedies without which our Materia Medica would not have been
completed. It is a nosode being prepared from a disease product i.e., Psoric viruses which, after undergoing the process of potentization, becomes much altered in its nature. The Homoeopathic preparation of it, is not “INERT” in the human economy, but, on the contrary, it is a powerful healing agent. It is a known fact that psora which is the mother of all other miasms, is the only real fundamental cause and producer of a variety of diseases which goes under the name of nervous debility, mania, hysteria and many others excepting the general chancre of
syphilis and the condylomatous diseases of sycosis. That is why, great Psorinum can show its magic.

Psorinum should not be given for psora or the psoric diathesis but like every other remedy, upon a strict individualization of the totality of symptoms and then only we realize its wonderful work.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Acne, Asthma, Cholera infantum, Cough, Constipation, Debility, Diarrhoea, Diphtheria, Dyspepsia, Ear trouble, Eczema, Enuresis, Glandular affection, Gonorrhoea, Gout, Headache, Influenza, Itching, Liver affection, Polypus, Quinsy, Skin affection, Throat and lung affection, Tonsillitis, Ulcer, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The therapeutic field of this remedy is found in all the psoric manifestations. Its action is principally centred upon skin, subcutaneous tissues, lungs, intestine, mind and gland.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces OFFENSIVENESS OF ALL THE DISCHARGES. All secretions and excretions are of extremely foul, CARRION LIKE ODOUR, having very filthysmell. Acting on intestine, it produces profuse watery diarrhoea, especially in the morning. It also produces otorrhoea which is very much offensive and ichorous.

CONSTITUTION

Psoric constitution, prone to skin affections.

Make-up of the body: Lean and thin person with skin eruptions having fithy smell of the body which persists even after washing.

Relation with heat and cold: Extremely Chilly patient (Hepar sulph., silicea). Wants warm clothings even in hot summer weather.

Miasm: Undoubtedly psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. In chronic cases when the well selected remedy fails to relieve or permanently improve and when even sulphur seems indicated but fails to act, Psorinum should be thought of.
2. Great debility : Independent of any organic disease, especially the weariness remaining after acute diseases with lack of reaction, i.e,     phagocytosis defective, when well chosen remedies fail to act.
3. Extremely chilly : Wants warm clothing even in hot summer weather (Hepar sulph., silicea).
4. All secretions and excretions of the BODY ARE FOUL SMELLING HAVE CARRION LIKE ODOUR.
5. Skin eruptions appear in every winter which is dry, thick and dirty looking.
6. Hungry in the middle of the night. Must have something to eat.
7. Profuse perspiration after acute disease with relief of all sufferings (Nat. mur.).
8 . There is decided amelioration of all complaints by lying down and by perspiration.
9 . Feels unusually well day before the attack begins.
10. Mind : Very much anxious, full of fear, melancholic, very depressed with suicidal thoughts; despondent. Fears that he will die, that he will fail in business. Religious melancholy, very depressed and despair of salvation. Thinks that he has sinned away his days of grace; he sees darkness around him; feels no joy in his family; despair of recovery from his sickness. Extremely irritable and wants to be alone.
Fears that he will die, that he will fail in his business; making his own life and that of those around him intolerable. Anxious, full of fear and evil forebodings (Phos).

11. Ailments from: Suppression of skin eruption, change of weather, exposure to cold, ete.

O©OMrAAA

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Change of weather.

Character. Chronic: headache. Periodic type of headache; every two or three days, recurrent headache. Violent rush of blood to the head. Headache is violent, throbbing hammering type of pain with sensation as if the brain were too large. Headache at change of weather.

psorinum 501
eee
Modalities :

e Aggravation: FROM COLD AIR and winter.
¢ Amelioration: By eating, covering head and sweating.

Concomitants: Headache is associated with hunger. Often the appetite lasts during the whole period of headache. Must get up at night to eat something.

Ear:

Causation : History of suppression of skin diseases. Offensive otorrhoea which is thick, purulent and offensive. Continuous discharge with eruptions behind the ears. Otitis media. Abscess in the middle ear with prolonged discharge, oozing from the abscess. Discharges are thin, foetid, ichorous and horribly offensiue like spoiled meat.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :
Diarrhoea :

© Causation: Suppression of skin eruptions, change of weather, after severe acute diseases and teething in children.

¢ Time: From 1 to 4 a.m.

© Character of stool: Watery, profuse, dark, brown, very-much foetid, smells like carrion. It may be involuntary.

Constipation : Particularly in infants, obstinate constipation due to weakness of rectum. The stool
is very much hard and difficult with backache. Psorinum can be given when Sulphur fails.

Stomach : There is ravenous hunger. Hungry in the middle of the night. Must wake up at mid-night and must have something to eat. There is pain in the abdomen after eating with eructation tasting like rotton eggs.

Respiratory symptoms :

Throat : In CHRONIC TONSILLITIS and QUINSY, when tonsils are greatly swollen and there is difficult and painful swallowing. Sensation as if there is burning and scalding in the throat.

Character of pain: There is cutting, tearing type of pain especially when swallowing.

Modalities:

¢ Aggravation from cold air, cold food and drink.
* Amelioration by warm application and covering.

Concomitants: With throat troubles, there is profuse offensive saliva and tough mucus in the throat. Posorinum not only relieves the acute attack, but also ERADICATES the TENDENCY THERETO.

Asthma :
* Causation: Due to suppression of skin eruptions.
© Character: There is great dyspnoea on least exertion with cough and weakness in the chest.
* Modalities: Worse from sitting up and in open air.
Better by lying down and keeping arms spread wide apart.

© Concomitants: In Psoric patients who are highly chilly, greatly sensitive to atmospheric changes and having offensive smell of the body we think of Psorinum.


502 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Leucorrhoea :

The leucorrhoea is lumpy and has got VERY OFFENSIVE CARRION LIKE ODOUR with severe backache and debility.

Skin :
Eczema due to supression of skin eruptions. Skin looks dirty and unhealthy even after thorough

washing. The eruption may be dry, scaly or moist. Whatever may be the eruption of the skin, it becomes thick and indurated.

The skin is very much sensitive to atomospheric changes. There is intense itching which leads the patients to despair. He scratches until the part becomes raw. There may be violent itchingfrom the warmth of bed without any eruption. The eczema of scalp, face and behind the ear oozes out
WATERY AND FOETID DISCHARGE. The skin eruptions are worse from bathing and warmth of bed. Although the patient is VERY CHILLY and wants to ever up, the affected portion of skin is exposed and dose not like to keep it covered.

The skin is generally dry and sweats rarely; urticaria after exertion, when sweat occurs, it relieves all sufferings (Natrum mur.).

Acne : All forms, simplex, rosacea; during menses, from coffee, fats, sugar, meats when the best selected remedy fails or only palliates.

Modalities:
© Aggravation: From warmth of bed, warm application, covering and open air.
¢ Amelioration: By sweating.
The baby has psoric constitution. The baby is pale, delicate, sickly and HIGHLY CHILLY. Wants to

cover up all the time. The child is jolly and happy and plays all day, but becomes restless, troublesome and screams all night (Lac canium-rev. of Lyco.).

Baby is hungry all the time, especially hungry in the middle of the night; must get up to have something to eat.
Baby has a FILTHY SMELL ALL OVER THE BODY, EVEN AFTER BATHING. All excretions of the body e.g., diarrhoea, perspiration, breath, etc. have a carrion-like odour.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: Change of weather, in excessive heat of sun, from cold draughts of cold air.

Amelioration: From warm clothing, Sweating and eating.

Relations :
Complementary to: Sulphur and Tuberculinum.
Inimical to: Apis, Lachesis, Croton tig.
Antidoted by: Nux vomica and Coffea.

chapter: 170 PULSATILLA NIGRICANS

See
Wind flower HAHNEMANN Ranunculaceae
Anemone

{NTRODUCTION

Pulsatilla is predominantly a WOMAN’S REMEDY; usually teen-aged girls with the characteristic mental and uterine symptoms. This does not necessarily mean that it is not useful to men. There is no doubt that if the symptoms agree, it will be of immense value for
ailments of men as well.

Just keep in mind the following to remember PULSATILLA.

Passive patients, come for consultation. Unlike Ignatia, craves consolation,

Like April day, has changeable mood, Stomach cannot hold rich and fatty food, All complaints accompany thirstlessness with dry tongue,
Thick green yellowish discharge makes her funk,

Irregular and painful menses, suppressed, delayed and scanty, Leucorrhoca is also acrid, burning and creamy,

In Labour pain, wants door and windows open, And cannot lie on back for desire for urine sharpen.

CLINICAL

Acne, Abortion, Anaemia, Amenorrhoea, Appetite, Bladder affections, Breast affections, Bronchitis, Catarrh, Chest affections, Chillblains, Cold, Colic, Cough, Diarrhoea, Distension, Dyspepsia, Ear and Eye affection, Fever, Female gential organs, Glandular Ophthalmia, Gonorrhoea, Gout, Haemorrhoid, Headache, Heart affections, Heart bum, Labour, Lactation, Leucorrhoea, Measles, Menstrual disorder, Mumps,
Neuralgia, Pregnancy—disorders of, Rheumatism, Respiratory troubles, Sleep, Toothache, Thrist, Urinary affections, Varicose veins, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main seats of action of Pulsatilla are veins, mucous membrane of tongue, stomach, bowels, female genital organs such as ovary, uterus, vagina, eyes and ears.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces irritation and catarrhal inflammation of mucous membrane, HAVING THICK BLAND, GREEN YELLOWISH DISCHARGES, venous engorgement and
congestion. It causes contractive pains in uterus. Pulsatilla also causes burning sensation on palms and soles and tongue. Furthermore, it produces arthritic or rheumatic inflammation. The veins seem to lose their vital resistance under the
influence of Pulsatilla so that varicosis occurs, especially of rectum. In eyes it acts on lids producing inflammation and catarrhal discharge. From the ear too, there is purulent discharge.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Usually ladies who are fair and beautiful-looking but inclined to be fleshy with fine hair and blue eyes, soft and lax muscels, anaemic and chlorbtic with pale face at puberty. Pulsatilla patient can be compared to the race of SHEEP, as Antim crud. to SWINE and Arsenic to RACE of HORSE

Temperament: Full of tears, slow, phelgmatic and indecisive.

Relation with heat and cold: It is controversial point whether Pulsatilla is a hot or
chilly drug. Dr. KENT says that there is a pendulum like action between heat and cold relation amongst complementary remedies.

TYLER BOERICKE AND ALLEN say that it is a chilly drug. KENT says that it is a hot blooded patient. But after using the remedy for some time, it will be noticed that the patient goes to the other extreme and becomes chilly or hot as the case may be.

Miasm: Psoric and sycotic miasms are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Changeability of symptoms : Such as, the pain shifts from one joint to another, no two stools are alike, no two chills are similar. The whole case will appear as if mixed up having no head or tail when the patient relates her complaints. Mental condition changes rapidly. In short it has ever changing character of symptoms.

2. Weeping disposition : The patient weeps easily. It is almost impossible to detail her ailments without weeping.

3. Chilliness : The patient has constant chilliness, but aversion to cover. The patient likes open air. Feels uncomfortable and suffocated in a closed, stuffy and heated room.
4. Pain : The pain shows the following characteristics.
(a) Pain comes gradually and disappears suddenly or pain appears suddenly and goes gradually,
(b) Pains are accompanied by Chilliness. Greater the pain more severe is the chill.
(c) Pain is SHIFTING IN CHARACTER, moves from one joint to another and from one part to the other.
(d) Pain is relieved by pressure, lying on affected side and by cold application. Pain is aggravated from hot application and lying on painless side.


pulsatilla Nigricans 505

5. Thirstlessness : There is thirstlessness with nearly all complaints with dry white coated tongue (Nux mos.). HERING SAYS the thirst is rare, but when thirsty, drinks often and little at a time which provokes vomiting. Bad taste in the mouth especially in the morning.
6. Discharges : All discharges from mucous membranes are thick, bland, greenish- yellow, but vaginal discharges such as leucorrhoea are sometimes acrid and excoriating causing rawness of the parts (Kent.)
7. Derangements : Especially at puberty. “Never been well since that time”, says the patient referring to puberty or menarche.
8. Menses : Too late and scanty or suppressed particularly by getting feet wet.
9. Desire : For open air, fatty food. Disagrees meat, bread, milk and smoking.
10. Sensation : All gone sensation in stomach, especially in tea drinkers.
11. Sleep : Sleepless in the first of night; from ideas crowding in the mind and sleeps late in the morning. Sees frightful dreams.
12. Diarrhoea only or usually at night.
13. There is aggravation from warm in general and amelioration from cold in general and from open air.
14. Pulsatilla is one of the best remedies with which to begin the treatment of a chronic case.
15. Mind : Mental symptoms of Pulsatilla give us the most important clues to the
selection of the remedy, which are as follows:
The patient is mild, gentle, amiable in character, yielding disposition, but sometimes timid too.

Changeability of mental conditions runs through the whole drug. So there may be indifference and irritability; hence the expression ‘Gay like April day’ with changeable mood applies to Pulsatilla patient. Weeping disposition. The patient is always Tull of tears. So she cannot relate her complaints without weeping (Med.).

She has hypochondrical moroseness; takes bad side of everything which disgusts the patient.

Consolation: gives her immense comfort and relief (rev.— Ign., Nat. mur., Sepia, Hell.).

The patient is highly emotional, afraid in the evening, fears to be alone. Fear of
darkness and of ghosts. There is morbid fear of meeting the opposite sex.

16. Ailments from : Chill getting feet wet; eating fatty and starchy food; ice cream; tea and coffee, abuse of mercury, quinine, sulphur, chamomilla, abortion, irregular menses; ovarion and uterine troubles; worm affection in children and
indigestion.


506 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation : Headache is from overloading the stomach, fatty diet and stooping.
Location: One sided headache especially in the forehead and temples.
Sensation ; One sided headache especially in the forehead.

Character: Bruised pain, stupefying headache. There is great heaviness on stooping. Dullness of
head; headache with aching pain in the eyes. Throbbing, pressive headache, pressive and constrictive
pain in temples; violent pain on one side as if a nail was driven in beating, jerking and lacerating
headache.

Modalities: Aggravation by stooping, lying down or exposure to cold.

Relief by sitting, in the morning and by pressure.

Concomitants: Confusion in head, vertigo as if intoxicated with nausea and inclination to vomit.
Apoplexy with unconsciousness: violent beating in head, pain in the eyeballs.
Eyes:

There is dryness of eyes and lids; with sensation as if darkened by mucous. Pressure as from sand in eyes. Conjunctivitis with PROFUSE, THICK, YELLOW, BLAND DISCHARGE; BURNING AND ITCHING in the eyes and inflammation of eyes, margins of eyelids with lachrymation and nightly
agglutination. There may be styes, especially on upper eyelids with itching, biting and burning. Opthalmia
may also be treated successfully with Pulsatilla.

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Mouth : Mouth is dry in the morning without thirst. Bad taste and smell from mouth in the morning.
Accumulation of saliva in the mouth.
Saliva gives sweetish taste; constant spitting of frothy cotton like mucous (Nux mos.).

Tongue : Loss of taste: nothing tastes good. In catarrh, the tongue is white or yellow and coated with tenacious mucus.
Tongue is parched dry, yet no thirst. Tongue feels too broad and too large; edge of tongue feels sore as if scalded.

Toothache worse in morning and at night and in a warm room, Pain in gums.

Stomach :

© Causation: Eating rich and fatty food, fruits, ice-cream, tea, worms in case of children; weakness
of stomach, indigestion and suppressed menses.

The above factors may cause nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain, abdominal colic and diarrhoea.
* Nausea: Felt in the throat as if worms are crawling, nausea may end in vomiting.

Vomiting of blood or of bilious matter. Therefore, the vomitus is green with pale face and chilliness; but not thirst.
* Epigastric pain: There is pain in the pit of stomach. The character of pain and the accompanying symptoms are just as mentioned above under item No. 4 of the guiding symptoms.

There is sensation of weight as from a stone in the stomah, about an hour after eating. Pressure in pit of stomach after meals with growing distress when stomach is empty.
pulsatilla Nigricans say

Arising out of eating fat, greasy, rich food or pork, there may be styes especially on upper lid.

Colic : Flatulent colic after supper or at night. Oppressive flatulence in upper abdomen and hypochondria. Colic and pain obliges the patient to bend forward. Abdomen is painful and sensitive to touch.

Diarrhoea :
¢ Causation: Fatty food, fruits, cold drinks, ice-cream, etc.
¢ Time: Only or usually at night (China).

¢ Character of stool; Watery stool, sometimes unconsciously evacuated. Greenish, yellow and
slimy. NO TWO STOOLS ARE ALIKE, very much changeable.

* Concomitants: Dry tongue with no thirst.
* Modality: Aggravation: At night, by fatty food, ice-cream, tea, etc.

Respiratory symptoms :
Cough :

© Causation: Usually caused by irritation in pit of stomach, by taking ice cold things, fatty and
starchy food, ice-cream, or due to suppressed menses.

© Sensation: Pressure and soreness upon the chest.

© Character of cough: Cough is shaking and spasmodic; in paroxysms of two coughs (Merc.
sol.—3 paroxysms, Cup met., Stannum—Single paroxysm, Calc. Carb.). The patient feels as if vapour of
sulphur is in trachea and chest. Cough is dry, in the evening and at night.

© Character of sputa: Expectoration of COPIOUS AND GREENISH YELLOW MUCUS. Bitter
or purulent or there may be dark coagulated blood.

* Modality: Aggravation: By warmth of bed, night, evening, after every sleep and after lying down.

© Concomitants: Involuntary urination while coughing there may be pain in lower part of chest,
more severe the pain more severe the chill, anguish and shuddering.

There may also be phthisis in suppurative stage in chlorotic girls. Further more, there may be asthma
in young girls dure to suppressed menses. There may also be stitching pain in chest, worse frotn deep
breath and persistent bronchial catarth. ‘-

Reproductive System :

Menses : All complaints can be traced to the time of puberty. Ailments on and from the pubertic
age. “Has never.been well since that time”.

Many of the complaints originate from suppressed menses.
Dysmenorrhoea :
* Causation: After getting feet wet.
* Time: Delayed menses comes too late.
* Duration: Shon duration of menses Is very well marked.
© Quantity: Scanty menses.

© Character of blood: Flow is thick and changeable in character. Blood flows, stops and flows
again. Sometimes intermittent flow, mixed with clots or water, coagulable in character. Flow is more during day and while walking.

With menses there is vomiting and purging. There is dry tongue with complete absence of thirst.

With menses there is severe pain across the abdomen which is shifting in nature. Especially in?those
ladies who are lovely looking and are having fair complexion.

Leucorrhoea : Milky white, with swollen vulva. Acrid, burning and painless or with cutting pain in
abdomen. While all the discharges are bland, leucorrhoea is acrid, excoriating and corrodes the vulva.

Labour pain : Difficult and irregular, sluggish labour pain. During labour pain the patient wants doors and windows open. Cannot bear stuffy warm room. Feels suffocated. Dr. Huges praises Pulsatilla for its spontaneous version in case of abnormal presentation; useful in retained placenta, postpartum haemorrhage, etc.

Abortion : Threatened abortion, the flow ceases and starts again with double force and ceases again. Pulsatilla promotes expulsion of moles, says Hering.
General Modalities :

Aggravation: Warm air, warm room, warmth of bed, heat in the evening, lying on the left or on the painless side, rest, rich and fatty food, puberty, pregnancy when allowing feet to hang down.

Amelioration: Cold, air, erect position, motion, open air after a good cry, lying on painful side, cold
application, cold food and drinks, though not thirsty.
Relations :

Inimical to: Sepia.

Antidotes: China, Coffea, Ignaria, Nux, Sulphur.

Antidoted by: China, Lyco.

Complementaries: Silica, Fluoric acid, Kali mur., Lyco.

Silicea is the chronic of Pulsatilla.
chapter: 171 PYROGEN

ee
A product of Sepsis DRYSDALE A Nosode

INTRODUCTION

Pyrogen is a nosode and is prepared from the pus of septic abscess. It corresponds to streptococcus and other antifebrile vaccine. Pyrogen can very conveniently be called a “G(OMOEOPATHIC DYNAMIC ANTI-SEPTIC’. The pus from the septic abscess when potentised, serves as a great anti-septic remedy. Pyrogen can be said to be the “ACONITE OF TYPHOID QUALITY OF PYREXIA’.

CLINICAL

Abscess, Bedsores, Constipation, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Eczema, Enteric fever, Heart affection, Labour, Puerperal fever,
Ptomaine poisoning, Pyaemia, Sepsis, Ulcers, Vomiting, Urinary disorders, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Pyrogen predominantly acts on blood, heart, cardio-vascular system, gastro-intestinal tract, skin, mucus membrane and uterus.
PATHOGENESIS

The action of Pyrogen results in a septic condition, setting in sapraemia or septicaemia, blood poisoning. It also causes septic fevers, typhoid condition, puerperal sepsis, diphtheria and the like.

“Sepsis” is the essence of the action of Pyrogen.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. In Sapraemia or septicaemia puerperal or surgical, from ptomaine poisoning or sewer gas infection, when the best selected remedy fails to relieve or permanently improye. Pyrogen should be thought of.
2. All discharges are horribly offensive—menstrual, lochial, diarrhoea, vomitus, sweat, breath, etc. (Merc sol., Psor., Kreosote, Baptisia).
3. Chronic complaints that date back to a previous septic condition.
4. The bed feels too hard (Am). Parts rested upon feels sore and bruised (Bapt.) with rapid decubitus (Carb. acid).
5. The patient is very much restless; must move constantly to relieve the soreness of parts (Arn., Euph. Rhus., Bapt.).
6. Tongue is very CLEAN AND SMOOTH AS IF VARNISHED AND FIERY red (Crotalus hor., Per. met. and Apis).
7. Pus-like or sweetish, terribly foetid taste in the mouth.
8. Marked tachycardia is a very striking feature. PULSE abnormally out of proportion to temperature.
9. Distinct consciousness of the heart with cardiac asthenia from septic conditions.
10. Ailments from : Septic condition, sapraemia or septicaemia, puerperal or surgical; from ptomaine poisoning or sewer gas infection, dissecting wounds, chronic malaria and after effects of miscarriage.

PARTICULARS

Septic fever :

Pyrogen is a great remedy for ALL TYPES OF SEPTIC FEVER, e.g. typhoid, puerperal fever, ptomaine poisoning or sewer gas infection, wherever the symptoms peculiar to this drug are present,
which are as follows:-

Causation: It is caused by any septic condition such as septicaemia or sapraemia, puerperal or surgical, from ptomaine poisoning or sewer gas infection.

Temperature: Sudden heat with rise of temperature upto 103-106°F. Skin is very dry and burning, may be pale or cold. Heat is followed by cold and clammy sweat. The BED FEELS VERY HARD; parts

rested upon feels sore and burised; rapid decubitus. The patient is very much restless. He must move constantly to get relief from the soreness of parts.

Chill: Chill begins in the back, between the scapulae. Chill is very severe. Feels generally cold, but particularly of extremities and bones.

Sweat: Very offensive sweat; sometimes clammy.

Pulse: Pulse abnormaly rapid, 140-170 per minute, out of all proportion to temperature. Tachycardia.

Tongue: Tongue is very characteristic. Periodically the tongue is CLEAN AND SMOOTH, AS IF VARNISHED AND FIERY RED, large and flabby, dry and cracked, articulation is difficult.

Taste: There is PUS-LIKE taste in the mouth as from an abscess. Occasionally sweetish taste and terribly foetid smell from mouth may also appear.

Discharge: All the discharges are very offensive, such as diarrhoea, vomitus, breath, urine, menstrual blood or lochia.

In septic fever, especially puerperal, Pyrogen has demonstrated its worth as a great Homoeopathic dynamic antiseptic. During the course of diphtheria or typhoid when the best selected remedy fails to relieve of permanently improve.

Vomiting :

Vomiting is persistent in Pyrogen. The character of vomitus is brownish or COFFEE-GROUND and very offensive. In the case of impacted or obstructed bowels, there may be vomiting of stool, stercoracious vomiting. This sort of vomiting may accompany septic fevers.

Diarrhoea :

Diarrhoea is HORRIBLY OFFENSIVE (Psor.). Stool is brown or black; painless and involuntary. Stool
passes unconsciously along with flatus; uncertain stool.


pyrogen 511

Constipation :

Pyrogen is also a great remedy for Constipation, constipation with complete inertia. Obstinate
constipation from impaction or obstruction of faeces. Stool is large, BLACK AND VERY OFFENSIVE OF CARRION-LIKE SMELL; small black balls like olives.

Uterine symptoms :

Pyrogen is an excellent remedy in uterine troubles, especially in those cases who have never been well since a septic fever and also to arouse the vital capacity and reaction of uterus and to enable it to expel its contents. The remedy is often required when the foetus or secundines are retained, following abortion or confinement; foetus decomposed or dead for day. The discharges from the uterus are BLACK
DECOMPOSED AND HORRIBLY OFFENSIVE.

Pyrogen is also of great help in case of trouble arising from irregular lochia, which is very thin, acrid and brown and very much foetid or suppressed. There may be septic fever arising from and consequent upon or associated with suppressed lochia, followed by chill and profuse foetid perspiration.

Heart :

Pyrogen patient has distinct consciousness of the heart. The heart feels tired; as if enlarged, throbbing and pulsating constantly in ears, preventing sleep. Cardiac weakness is caused by septic condition.

Modality : Heart’s troubles are aggravated by motion.

Skin :

The skin of patients requiring Pyrogen is very pale, cold and of an ashy hue. Ulcers of old persons,
which are very offensive and obstinate.
General Modalities :
Aggravation : Heart’s action and cough are aggravated by motion.

Amelioration: There is general amelioration from motion.

Relations :

Complementary to: Bryonia.
Latent pyrogenic process, patient continually relapsing after apparent similimum .



chapter: 172

RADIUM BROMATUM

Radium Bromide DR. J.H.C. CLARKS W.H. Dieffenbach


INTRODUCTION

This remedy occupies its place near X-Ray in our homoeopathic Materia Medica. It is a very deep acting, constitutional, polychrest, medicine,
useful in dis-eases caused by mixed miasmatic states. Radium was first discovered in 1898 by prof. Madam Curie of Paris. It is an infallible remedy especially in skin lesions and in chronic rheumatic complaints.

CLINICAL

Acne. Arthritis. Bony affections. Cancer. Caruncle of urethra. Eczema. Epithelioma. Lupus. Naevus. Pruritus vulvae. Pigmented moles. Rodent ulcers. X-Ray bad effects.

SPHERE OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

Acts chieflly on skin producing redness, soreness, itching and ulcerations. Also acts on connective tissues like blood, bones, fibrous tissues and mucous membranes. It increases the polymorphs.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) History of repeated exposure to X-ray either for diagnos-tic or therapeutic purpose and/or history of radium therapy—there may be or may not    be such history, if symptoms agree, radium should be thought of.

2) When well indicated medicines fail to relieve or cure the mixed miasmatic conditions even after failure of nosodes like medo, syphi, etc.    should be thought of.

3) In mixed misamatic conditions produced by psora, sycosis and syphilis when well selected constitutional medicines does little good to the    patient.

4) Various kinds of skin lesions, such as keloids, naevi, pigmented mole, acne rosacea, lupus etc.

5) Old, obstinate, long standing ulcers, cases of rodent ulcers, and ulcers caused by Radium burn which take a long time to heal.

6) Chronic rheumatoid arthritis, osteo arthritis, spondylosis and gout

7) Severe aching pain all over the body, especially in joints with restlessness.

8) Burning—entire body feels as if a fire with needle pricks or electric shock—like pain during sleep.

9) Great weakness, letharginess, tiredness feeling, prostra-tion, debility run through mental as well as physical plane.

40) Aggravation at night and from warmth of bed and amelio-ration in open air and by continued motion in general.

11) Aversion to sweet, ice cream, meat, distaste for tobacco.

12) A peculiar metallic taste in mouth with increased saliva-tion (Merc.)

18) Vertigo with tendency to fall to left & occipital headache, when rising, better after sleep, warm bath, lying down and in open air.

14) Succession of small boils on forehead and chest.

15) Lateness in the onset of symptoms.

16) Nephritis with rheumatic symptoms.

17) Mentals: It has a very few but most striking mental symptoms. The patient is apprehensive, depressed, irrit-able, cross and easily vexed. He      has fear of being alone in the dark and wants to have some one near. Dreams of passing urine; of fire & of committing suicide. The dreams are     vivid and it takes some long time for the patients to realise that visions are not true.

PARTICULARS

Gastrointestinal Systems

Stomach : There is warm, empty feeling in stomach better after eating. Nausea & sinking sensation at pit of stomach. Loss of appetite. Aversion           to sweet, meat & ice cream.

Abdomen : The abdomen is distended with much foul flatulency. Pain over Me Burney’s point and at location of sigmoid flexure is peculiar symptom of this medicine. It has many alternating symptoms such as indigestion alternates with earache and pain in chest. Alternating constipation and diarrhoea. Yellow soft stools alternate with hard brown stools.

Urinary System : Has to waif some minutes before urine comes : dvsuria during day, urine contains brickdust sediment, albumin and granular casts. There is slight burning in urine. Nephritis with rheumatic
symptoms.

Rheumatism :
Causation : Bad effects of X-Ray or radium therapy.

Location : Almost all joints of the body are affected.

Sensation : Aching and tired feeling, legs, arms and neck feel hard and brittle as though they would break on moving.

Character of pain—Severe aching pain all over the body especially in knnd ankles. Sharp electirc shock or lightning like pain in joints. There is also aching pain and lamenes in back of neck, between shoulders and in lumbo-sacral region. Pain in cervical vertebrae worse bending head forward and better standing or sitting erect. Nephritis with rheumatism.

Modality : Aggravation—getting up, at night. Amelioration—Continued motion, pressure, after exercise.

Skin

Radium bromatum is indicated in many sorts of skin affections. There is intense itching with burning of skin as of a fire. Itching eruptions on face with oozing, worse shaving. Scaly circumscribed eruptions on flexor side of the forearm worse scratching, better dry heat and in open air. Small pimples and succession of small boils especially on forehead and chest. It is a very effective remedy in keloids, pigmented moles naevi, Acne rosacea, corns & ulcerations with tendency to delayed healing. Chronic eczematous dermatitis of hands caused by Radium and X-ray
burns. Pruritus vulvae better after warm bath, crack & fissures, scaly excrescences that itch and burn most violently.
Modality :
Agg.—At night, scratching, warmth of bed. Ame.—Hot bath and in open air.

chapter : 173 RAPHANUS

Buttercup FRANZ Ranunculaceae

INTRODUCTION

Ranunculus bulbosus belongs to the natural order Ranunculaceae. This was proved and added to Materia Medica by Franz. The Mother tincture is prepared from the whole plant “buttercup”. The juice is highly excoriating and irritating to skin where it gives rise to many skin eruptions. Just like Rhus tox., it is poisonous and one is very often mistaken for the other. It is an excellent remedy for the bad effects of alcoholism.

CLINICAL

Alcoholism, Brain affection, Chest pain, Corns, Delirium tremens, Diarrhoea, Eczema, Intercostal rheumatism, Jaundice, Neuralgia, Skin troubles, Throat and Lung affection, Writers’ cramp, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on mucous membrane and serous membrane, skin, spinal nerves, pleurae and lungs as well as on intercostal muscles. ,

PATHOGENESIS

It causes irritation and smarting pain of eyes, nose and fauces. It also produces inflammation of the serous membrane, especially pleura and peritoneum where it sets up an acute stabbing pain accompanied by effusion and pleurisy. It irritates spinal nerves and causes INTERCOSTAL RHEUMATISM: NEURALGIA AND MYALGIA OF CHEST.

CONSTITUTION

There is no particular constitution for this drug. The patient however, is very chilly, irritable and quarrelsome, having psoric and gonorrhoea! background and have the rheumatic diathesis,

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It is one of the most effective remedies for the bad effects of alcoholic beverages, spasmodic hiccough and delirium tremens,

2. Day blindness (Hemeralopia) as if there is mist before the eyes. Pressure and smarting pain in eyeballs (Hering).

3. Pains are stitching, sharp, shooting, neuralgic and myalgic or rheumatism in the chest wall. Pains are aggravated by TOUCH. MOTION OR TURNING    THE BODY, during inspiration (Bry.), wet weather and stormy weather.

4. Pleurisy or pneumonia from sudden exposure to cold while overheated or vice versa.

5. Great sensitiveness to cold air and change of weather, especially to wet stormy weather.

6. Another keynote is SENSITIVENESS TO TOUCH, SORE BRUISED SENSATION; SORENESS OF THE PARTS AFFECTED, ESPECIALLY CHEST.

7, Corns on soles of feet (Antim. crud., Hypencum) which are very sensitive and painful to touch.

8. Mind : It has great depression of spirits, and desires to die. The patient is very irritable and quarrelsome. He has great fear of ghosts and    suffers from confusion of mind.

9. Ailments from : Bad effects of alcoholism, exposure to cold while overheated or vice versa and physical exertion.

PARTICULARS

Throax :

Chest region is the main seat of action of Ranunculus bulbosus; whether it is of inter-costal muscles in the form of rheumatism or neuralgia or myalgia or in pleura as pleurisy or in lungs as pneumonia, it matters little, Ranunculus is a great remedy. The cardinal symptoms are as follows:
Chest affections may be caused by exposure to cold when heated or vice versa and physical exertion, etc.

There is heavy, but short breathing with oppression of chest in the evening; sighing respiration.

Muscular pain about the margin of shoulder blades, especially hi woman of sedentary habits with
burning, from needle work, typewriting or piano-playing.

Intercostal rheumatism.

There is intolerable pain in the chest. It may be rheumatic or neuralgic or myalgic. The pain is stitching, sharp and shooting in character; coming in paroxysm and is excited or brought on by atmospheric change, or inflammation and depend upon spinal irritation.

Pleurisy or pneumonia, caused by sudden exposure to cold while overheated or vice versa may also call for this remedy.

Pain in the chest region if aggravated by touch, motion or turning of the body and in wet stormy weather.

Aggravation: During inspiration and lying on affectd side.
Skin :

Ranunculus bulbosus is a good medicine for the skin affections such as HERPES ZOSTER,
VESICULAR ERUPTIONS, corns, etc.


ranunculus Bulbosus 517

Herpes zoster appearing with, preceded or followed by intercostal neuralgia. The vesicles may have a bluish appearance with great burning.

Corns on soles of feet are very sensitive to touch, with smarting and burning pain.

Modality: Aggravation: From touch and from cold air.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In open air, MOTION (slightest movement), contact, atmospheric changes, wet stormy weather and in evening. Cold air brings on all sorts of ailments. Aggravation during inspiration and lying on affected side.

Amelioration: By sitting rather bent forward and leaning a little to the left.

Relations :
Incompatible: Alcohol, Wine, Sulph. Staph.
Antidoted by: Bry., Camph., Puls., Rhus.
Ranunculus bulbosus is a remedy for the writers’ cramp and professional neurosis.

Bryonia has stitching pain relieved by lying on affected side whereas the pain is aggravated by lying on affected side in the case of Ranunculus bulbosus.


chapter : 174  Radish NUSSER Cruciferae

INTRODUCTION

This is one of our new remedies. The tincture is prepared from fresh root immediately before flow-ering and also from the whole plant.

CLINICAL

Diarrhoea. Flatulence. Globus hystericus. Hysteria. Insomnia—sexual. Nymphomania. Post operative gas pains.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Incarceration of Flatulence i Accumulation & retention of flatus, no flatus emitted upward or downward’. Abdo-men distended, tympanitic, hard    & painful to pressure especially hypogaslrium. Distension of abdomen, fol-lowed by griping as if stool would occur. Burning in epigastrium      followed by hot eructations.

2) Diarrhoea : Stool brown, liquid, frothy, profuse & expel-led with much force. (Gambogia, croton tig.) It may be yellowish brown & extremely    fluid with colic.

3) Urine: Turbid with yeast like sediment. Profuse, thick urine like milk.

4) Nymphomania causing sleeplessness with aversion to her own sex.

5) Mind : Mentally Raphanus patient is characterised by a great dislike to her own sex. There is sadness with aver-sion to children especially    girls. It is a good medicine for hysteria with globus symptoms
  

chapter :175

RATANHIA Polygalaceae Mapato


INTRODUCTION

The Ratanhia tincture is prepared from the roots of krameria triandra, a plant growing in dry argil-laceous and sandy soils of Peru. The colour of the tincture is blood—red. It is a greatastringent and a styptic and is consequently used in passive haemorrhages.

CLINICAL

Fissures-anal and nipples. Haemorrhages. Haemor-rhoids. Pin worms. Toothache.

SPHERE OF ACTION

It has marked action on Gastrointestinal tract specially rectum & anus, also acts on nipple of breast & teeth.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Excruciating pains after stool ; burning after stool.

2) Fissures of anus with great sensitiveness of rectum.

3) Fissures of nipples in nursing women (Graph. Sep.)

4) Constipation : Hard stool with much straining; haemorrhoids protrude during stool & is followed by long lasting aching and burning in anus.   (Sulph.) There is pain after stool as if splinters of glass were sticking in anus & rectum.

5) Burning for hours after each stool is a characteristic symptom and is only relieved by the application of hot water.

6) Terrible toothache during early months of pregnancy; aggravation by lying, compelling to rise and walk about.

7) Pin worms with itching of anus. As regards the fissure of the anus & other rectal symptoms we may compare Ratanhia to Aesculus, Nitric acid,      Paeonia, Thuja & Collinsonia. In Aesculus the rectum feels full of small sticks like Ratanhia but there is in Aesculus the seasation of     fullness, dryness & heat in the rectum with severe dull pain in the lumbo-sacral articulation. In Paeonia, fissures with much oozing due to       ulceration of the mucous membrane of rectum and anus. The parts are usually swollen, offensive and moist all the time. Nitric Acid too has        the sensation of splinters and constric-tion in the rectum but this remedy should have preference when other constitutional symptoms are          present. In Collinsonia, also there is sensation as if sticks, sand or gravel had lodged inrectum but it is usually associated with chronic,      painful, bleeding piles. Thuja too has fissured anus, painful to touch but is sur-rounded with flat warts or moist mucous condylomata. Piles      swollen, pain most severe when sitting. There is violent pains in rectum compelling cessation of effort, stool recedes, after being partly        expelled (Sanic. Sil.)

chapter : 176 REMEX CRISPUS

Yellow Dock JOSLIN Polygonaceae
Curled Dock

INTRODUCTION

Rumex, the yellow dock, or curled dock, is a common British weed. This medicine was used by the Allopaths for the cure of itch, but we, Homoeopaths, use this medicine for diseases like, laryngitis, bronchitis, asthma and diarrhoea. No doubt, it is indicated in skin diseases as well when the symptoms agree. The leaves of this plant from which the drug is obtained and potentised are found to contain Bin oxalate of Potash. So, most of the symptoms manifested during proving, though partial, resemble those of potassium salts.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Aphonia, Asthma, Bronchitis, Catarrh, Cough, Coryza, Diarrhoea, Hoarseness, Phthisis, Rheumatism, Skin affection, Throat and Lung affections, Urticaria, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Rumex mainly acts upon mucous membrane of larynx, trachea, bronchi and bronchioles and mucous membrane of intestine and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

It diminishes the secretion of the mucous membrane and increases the sensibility of larynx and trachea yet does not pass into an inflammatory condition. It also produces a catarrrhal condition of intestine causing diarrhoea. Acting on skin it produces intense itching.
CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Usually thin, spare patients having narrow and flat chest.

Relation with heat and cold: Very CHILLY patient.

Miasm: Psora is-in the backgound.

Diathesis: Tubercular Diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Extremely sensitive to cold air and even to open air.

2. Cough worse from changing air or room.

3. Chilly patient : Aggravation from cold in general and relief by warmth and covering.

4. Left lung especially lower lobe, is predominantly affected.

5. Touching the throat pit brings on paroxyms of cough.

6. Eruption on various parts, aggravation from cold and cold afr, amelioration BY WARMTH AND COVERING.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory Symptoms :

Coryza : It suits to both acute and chronic catarrhal states. Nose is obstructed; dry sensation in posterior nares. Often coryza starts with a marked dryness in the posterior nares. Violent sneezing is a frequent occurrence.

Modalities:

* Aggravation: In the evening, at night and FROM COLD AIR.

* Amelioration: BY WARMTH AND COVERING.


Concomitants : This catarrhal state is commonly accompanied by morning diarrhoea.

Cough :
Causation: EXPOSURE TO COLD AIR.

Location: Lower lobe of left lung is generally affected.(Nat. sulph., Syphilinum).

Sensation: Tickling sensation in throat pit with rawness. Sensation of lump in throat; descends on swallowing but returns immediately.

Character of cough: Dry, incessant, fatiguing cough, hoarse barking cough WITH TICKLING SENSATION.

Dry teasing cough preventing sleep. Touching the throat-pit causes dry teasing cough. Cough with pain behind the sternum.

Character of sputa: Usually there is no expectortion but sometimes, in the frist stage, there is thin, watery, frothy expectoration; later it becomes yellowish, thick, tough, and tenacious; so ropy and stringy that the patient is exhausted from his efforts to expectorate the tough sputa.

Modalities:

¢ Aggravation: The patient is extremely sensitive to open air. EVEN CHANGING AIR OR ROOM BRINGS ON COUGH; FROM SLIGHTEST INHALATION OF COLD AIR, IN THE EVENING, after lying down and especially on left side. Touching or pressing the throat pit and lying on left side. Anything
which increases the volume or rapidity of inspired air which brings on a paroxysm of cough.

¢ Amelioration ; From warmth, keeping the mouth covered to exclude cold air; COVERING THE BODY WARMLY.

Concomitants: While COUGHING THERE is involuntary urination (Causticum, Arg. nit., Nat. mur.).

Hoarseness :

Hoarseness with uncertain voice, with raw sensation in larynx and trachea. There is tickling sensation in throat-pit.

Remex Crispus 523

Aphonia after exposure to cold, from slightest inhalation of cold air from changing room or air and relieved by warmth.

Aggravation in the evening (Aconite, Phos., Carbo veg.)

Stomach :

Cannot tolerate meat. It disagrees. It Causes eructation. Chronic gastritis; aching pain in the pit of stomach shooting in the chest.

Aggravation from motion or talking.

Diarrhoea :
Time: Early in the morning from 5 TO 10 A.M.. Drives out of bed early in the morning.

Character of stool: Stool is proufse and gushes out. Painless, offensive, brown or black, thin and watery.

Before stool: There is sudden urging, preceded by pain in abdomen.

Modality: Aggravation from motion and in the morning.

Concomitants: Catarrhal state alternates with diarrhoea.

Skin :

Intense itching of skin; itching of various parts, especially of lower extremities; urticaria.

Modalities:
* Aggravation from cold, WHEN UNDERSSING, UNCOVERING OR EXPOSURE TO COLD AIR.

* Amelioration : By covering the parts.

General Modalities :
Aggravation: Cold air; lying down and in the evening.

Amelioration : Warmth, keeping mouth covered to exclude cold air.

Relations :

Antidoted by: Bell., Camph.


chapter : 177 RHEUM

Rhubarb HAHNEMANN Polygonaceac

INTRODUCTION

Rheum is our everyday Rhubarb which grows plentifully in China. Hahnemann’s proving of Rheum has confirmed many of its traditional uses. This medicine is prepared from the powdered root.

CLINICAL

Colic. Dentition-difficult. Diarrhoea.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Suited to children especially during dentition.

2) Sour smell of the whole body ; child smells sour, even after washing or bathing (Hep. Mag C.)

3) Profuse & constant sweat on scalp ; whether asleep or awake, quiet or in motion, the hair is always wet; may or may not be sour. (Calc.    Sanic.).

4) Child is restless, irritable, peevish with pale face and sour smell during difficult dentition.

5) Desires various kinds of food, but canj\ot eat them ; becomes repugnant.

6) Colic : Aggravated at once while uncovering an .arm or leg and standing ; Not better by stool. Colic with sour stool.

7) Children cry & toss about all night (Psor.)

8) Ailments from : Eating unripe fruits, Dentition.

9) Mind : Mentally he is impatient & vehement, Ugly & impossible to satisfy. He screams, kicks & makes himself decidedly unpleasant. He cries &      tosses about all night. Desires various kinds of food but cannot eat them ; becomes repugnant. He desires many things and cries. He dislikes    even favourite playthings.

PARTICULARS

Rheum Baby

The whole body of the Rheum baby smells sour. No amount of washing'or bathing can rid it. Sourness pervades the whole system & characterises all the discharges & exhalations of the body. Rheum is suited especially to baby during dentition.

During difficult dentition, a child is very restless, irritable, peevish and his face looks pale, body smells sour.

There is constant & profuse sweat on scalp, forehead, face, mouth and nose. The hair is always wet whether asleep or awake, quiet or in motion. Sweat may or may not be sour.

Rheum baby desires various kinds of food but cannot eat them ; becomes repugnant child, desires many things & cries but dislikes even favourite playthings.

The colic of Rheum baby is worse at once by uncovering an arm or leg and when standing and not better by stool.

The child may suffer from difficult micturition due to great weakness of the bladder. He requires great deal of pressure to expel the accumulated urine from the inert bladder.

During dentition if stupor of the child is associated with distended abdomen, due to accumulation of urine in the bladder ; Rheum is invaluable remedy.

Mentally Rheum baby is impatient & vehement, ugly & impossible to satisfy. He has sour temper, screams, kicks & makes himself unpleasant. He is cross & tosses about all the night.

Relation :

Complimentary—Mag Garb.

Antidotes—Camphor, Chamomilla.

 
chapter : 178 

Snow Rose SEIDEL Ericaceae

INTRODUCTION

Rhododendron is an evergreen shrub found growing largely on the mountain tops of Siberia and is locally named as snow rose. For the Homoeopathic purpose, the tincture is prepared from the dried leaves of this plant. This remedy deserves a place in our Materia Medica by reason of its extensive use in RHEUMATIC AND GOUTY COMPLAINTS. In support of the doctrine of signature, CLARKE SAYS, “Growing among the fogs and storms of the Siberian mountains, its provings show that it produces, sensitiveness to storm and weather changes, and this gives the grand key-note for it in our Materia Medica”.

CLINICAL

Amenorrhoea, Bone affection, Bunions, Ciliary Neuralgia, Earache, Eye affections, Flatulence, Lumbago, Neuralgia, Orchitis, Rheumatism, Toothache, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It has a limited sphere of action on fibrous tissues particularly on big joints and the vertebral column. Serous membrane, pleura and synovial membranes also come under its action.

PATHOGENESIS

It acts as an irritant and produces excessive secretion from the synovial membranes in the joint and causing all the signs and symptoms of inflammation. Fibrous tissues get inflamed producing rheumatic and gouty changes, Pleurisy results when the pleura gets affected but usually of the wet type.

CONSTITUTION

Temperament : Nervous patients who DREAD A STORM.

Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Rheumatic and gouty diathesis,

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Dread of a storm is the key-note of this remedy.

2. Usually right sided affection e.g., right testes, extremeties.

3. All the symptoms are WORSE IN A WINDY, STORMY WEATHER, worse even before the storm, especially an electrical storm (Nat. carb., Phos.,       Psorinum, Silicea, Gels.).

4. Chilly patient; aggravation from a sudden change of weather and relief from warmth in general.

5. Induration and swelling of testicles after gonorrhoea or rheumatic exposure.

6. Cannot get sleep or remain asleep unless the legs are crossed.

PARTICULARS

Toothache :

Causation: In every spring and fall; SHARP EAST WIND.

Character: There is violent jerking pain involving dental nerves from temple to lower jaw and chin with swollen teeth.

Modalities:

¢ Aggravation : By cold and during a thunder-storm.

© Amelioration: By warmth and external heat.

Male genital organs :
Testes : Orchitis with swelling and induration of testicles.

Causation: From suppressed gonorrhoea.

Location: Right sided affection.

Sensation: Sensation in glands as if they were being, crushed.

Character of pain: Orchitis with much swelling in rheumatic patient. Drawing, tearing pain in spermatic cord. There is swelling of testes with much pain, glands feel crushed, as if drown up.

Modalities :

* Aggravation: From taking cold, from sitting on a cold stone, from suppressed gonorrhoea. before a storm especially an electric storm.

© Amelioration: From warmth and motion.

Rheumatism :
Causation: from cold, damp and WINDY WEATHER.

Location: Right side principally affected.

Sensation: Sore and bruised feeling.

Character of pain: It is a very useful remedy in gouty patient, who suffer rheumatic pains.

Acute inflammatory swelling of the joints. There is drawing, tearing pains in all the limbs. The pain Sometimes WANDERS FROM ONE JOINT TO ANOTHER. There js tearing, shooting pain, sore bruised Pain, with stiffness of joints, neck and back, Pain in dorsal region, extending to arm, pain in bone and periosteum, pain drives him out of bed. Pain in the shoulder joint is so severe that the arm cannot be moved. The patient cannot sleep unless the legs are crossed. st Gout with fibrous deposits in great toe joint.


Modalities:

* Aggravation: During rest, before and during a storm.
¢ Amelioration: By warmth, wrapping up, moving or walking about.
General Modalities :

Aggravation : STORMY, WINDY WEATHER, electric, changes in the atmosphere, on approach of a THUNDERSTORM, symptoms reappear with rough weather, right side.

Amelioration: Better from wrapping up the head, warm, dry heat, motion, external heat and eating.


Relations :

Compare: Bryonia, Conium, Lycopodium, Rhus tox.



chapter : 178

RHUS TOXICODENDRON

Poison Oak HAHNEMANN Anacardiaceae

INTRODUCTION

Rhus is a native medicine of the North America and is one of those most valuable medicines which we owe to thedomestic practice of the North American Indians. Hahnemann in his Materia Medica Pura praised thismedicine as a remarkable and valuable medicinal substancehaving a great number of characteristic peculiarities in itsaction. There are other members of the Rhus family which are also used in the Homoeopathic Therapeutic.

CLINICAL

Abortion, Beriberi, Cough, Chilblains, Cyanosis,Dengue fever, Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Eczema, Entericfever, Erysipelas, Eye and Ear affection, Gout, Headache, Herpes zoster, Lumbago, Measles,Menstrual disorders, Neuralgia, Paralysis, Ptosis, Pyaemia, Rheumatism, Restlessness, Sciatica,Sleep, Sprain, Tongue affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Rhus tox. acts predominantly upon the organs of animal life, upon the mucous membrane, lymphatic glands, skin, muscular tissues and component parts of joints e.g. LIGAMENTS, FIBROUS TISSUES,TENDONS, etc.

PATHOGENESIS

By its actions, it produces a condition of primary irritation of serous membrane which may proceedto inflammation or if it stops, it produces serous discharge, effusion and oedema. On the skin it producestheumatoid inflammation, eruptions, burning and itching. The lymph glands throughout the body enlargeand inflame under the influence of Rhus tox. When circulatory system becomes the seat of its action, itcauses a state of blood poisoning typhoid like symptoms and febrile disturbances. Intermittent fevers, etc.are also noticed.

CONSTITUTION

Since it is more or less an acute remedy, the physical, make-up or temperament, is not of much importance. However, the patient is very chilly, easily susceptible to cold and aggravated by cold in general.

Relation with heat and cold: Very CHILLY patient. Even open air is intolerable.

Miasm: Psora is in the background of all the troubles.

Diathesis: Rheumatic and gouty diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It is one of the NASH’S TRIO OF RESTLESS MEDICINES. CANNOT STAY INONE PLACE. MUST CHANGE POSITION FREQUENTLY TO OBTAIN RELIEFFROM PAIN (others    of the trio are Aconite and Arsenic).

2. Great rigidity, stiffness and lameness and pain are experienced on first moving the Joints after rest or on waking up in the morning; RELIEVED    BY WALKING OR CONTINUED MOTION.

3. Most complaints are relieved by movement and aggravated by rest.

4, Aggravation at night and in damp rainy weather, and relieved by heat in general e.g., covering the body, warm application, etc.Great    sensitiveness to open air. Putting the hand outside from under the bed-cover brings on cough (Hepar, Rumex, Baryta).for)

5. Triangular red-tipped tongue with imprint of teeth and bitter taste in the mouth.x1

6. Desire for cold milk which relieves gastric complaints (In Iodium cold milk relieves constipation and in Graph, warm milk relieves gastric    symptoms).

7. Great apprehension at night; cannot remain in bed in one position.

8. Desire for sweets, beer, oysters and aversion to meat and liquor.

9. Mind : Extreme restlessness, with desire for continuous change of position.Delirum with fear and suspicion of being poisoned (Kyos.). Sad,        patient begins to weep without knowing why. DREAMS of great exertion, rowing, swimming and working hard at his daily occupation (Bry.).

11. Ailments from : Spraining or straining a single part, muscle or tendon (Calec., Nux,), overlifting, particularly stretching high up to reach     things, lying on damp ground, FROM WETTING and too much summer bathing in lake or river; cold air; getting wet when heated.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: FROM BEER or too much summer bathing.

Sensation: Brain feels loose when stepping or shaking the head. Sensation of swashing in brain; stupefying; brain feels as if torn.

Location: Frontal headache especially.

Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: By sitting or lying in cold,

© Amelioration: By warmth and motion,Concomitants; Vertigo when standing or walking, aggravation when lying down, stooging (Bry.), and
amelioration when rising from bed.

Cough :

Causation: From exposure to cold or even to open air, putting hand outside from under the bed cover brings on cough.

Character of cough: Hoarsensess arid scrapping rawness in larynx with roughness and soreness in chest. Short dry respiration; very much oppressed and anxious. Short dry cough from tickling in trachea. Cough in morning soon after waking. Spasmodic cough that seems to shatter the head.

Modalities:

¢ Aggravation: Before a storm, after midnight, bathing, exposure to cold and inspiration and rest.

e Amelioration: By wrapping up warm application and dry clear weather.

paralysis :

Causation: From getting feet, wet, on lying on damp ground, after exertion, parturition, sexual excess, ague or typhoid.

Location : Any and every part of the body is likely to be affected, especially the extremities, eye- lids, etc.

Character: Paralysis with numbness of affected parts, paresis of limbs, ptosis.

Diarrhoea :

Causation: Damp wet weather and summer bathing.

Character of stool: Watery stool, involuntary, usually with beginning of typhoid.

Concomitants: Great thirst with dry tongue, mouth and throat, with great exhaustion and pain streaming down the posterior part of lower limbs during stool.

Fever :

Rhus tox. is a medicine which may be indicated in any and every kind of fever—INTERMITTENT FEVER, CONTINUOUS FEVER, REMITTENT FEVER and the like.

(a) Intermittent fever.

Before chill: Dry teasing cough with taste of blood

During chill: Cough of the same character. Great thirst with dry,, tongue, mouth and throat.

Heat: Corners of mouth ulcerated. There may also appear fever blisters around the mouth and chin. The patient is very much restless with mental anxiety.

Sweat stage: Great exhaustion with relief from fever

(b) Remittent and continuous fever like typhoid, influenza, dengue arid the like.

Causation: Summer bathing, rainy Weather, damp weather, exposure to cold air, walking in damp place, tank and river bathing.

Mode of onset: Usually there is insidious onset, or when acute diseases assume a typhoid form. At the onset; Diarrhoea with begining of typhoid.

During fever: Restlessness. Cannot stay in one position. Must change position often to obtain telief from pain (From mental anxiety).

Arsenic : Everything on which the patient lies seems too hard, Arnica, Needs covering because of Sreat sensitiveness to open air.

Tongue : Having TRIANGULAR RED TIP: tongue dry cracked, sore with imprint of teeth.

Delirium :; Low muttering type of delirium, talks about rowing, swimming, daily occupation, etc. Bry,). Fever blisters appear around the mouth and chin.
Modality: Aggravation: In midnight, damp wet rainy weather.

After fever: Paresis or paralytic condition of single muscles, or of lower limbs, and ptosis, etc.

Rheumatism :

Better adapted to patients with rheumatic diathesis.

Causation: Lying on damp.ground, summer bathing or river bathing, working in damp place and handling clay..

Location: Rheumatism, of any joint especially joints of right side.

Sensation: There is pain as if sprained, as if a muscle or tendon were torn from its attachemt, as if bones were scrapped with a knife. Affected parts are very sore to touch.

Concomitants: Great restlessness, anxiety and apprehension. Cannot remain in bed at one place; always wants to be moved. Lameness, stiffness and pain are well-marked.

Modalities: Aggravation: After mid-night, in wet rainy weather, on first moving and on getting up in the morning.

Relief: By walking or continued motion.

Concomitants: Along with the fever, heart disease may appear.

Backache :

Causation: Too much summer bathing in river or lake, lying on damp ground or straining.

Location: Between shoulders and small of the back.

Sensation: Pain with stiffness. Pain on swallowing.

Modalities:

* Aggravation: By sitting and lying.

¢ Amelioration: By motion, lying on something hard.

Skin:

Erysipelas VESICULAR ERUPTIONS, vesicles are yellow, from left to right, with much swelling, inflammation, burning; itching and stinging; skip of external genitals inflamed, erysipelatous and oedematous.

Modalities: Worse at night, cold wet rainy weather and amelioration by dry weather and warm application.

In chronic urticaria when Rhus tox. seems indicated but fails to cure.Bovista should be thought of.


General Modalities :

Aggravation: Before a thunderstorm, cold wet rainy weather, at night, from getting wet while perspiring and during rest.

Amelioration: Warmth, dry weather, wrapping up; warm or hot \things; motion; change of
position; moving affected parts.

Relations :

Complementary to: Bryonia.


hus Toxicodendron 08S

Inimical to: Apis, Before or-after, especially.in skin diseass.

Antidotes : Ant. tart., Ranan.

Antidoted by: Bell., Merc., Sulph.


Compare: Amiga, Bryonia, Natrum sulph., and Sulphur. Rhus tox. is best antidoted by its sintilimum the potentised remedy given internally.

chapter: 179 RUTA GRAVEOLENS

Rue HAHNEMANN Rutaceae

INTRODUCTION

Amongst many remedies in our Materia Medica, for injuries caused by mechanical devicesand appliances, Ruta is one possessing prime importance. This is prepared from a shrub-likeplant indigenous in Europe and is widelycultivated in the gardens. The juice of the plant iscapable of causing irritation and inflammation ofthe skin when touched. The mother tinctureisprepared from the fresh herb collected beforeblooming. The irritating and inflammatorycharacter of the plant is transformed into anexcellent therapeutic property after undergoingthe process of potentization.

CLINICAL

Amblyopia, Bone diseases, Bruises, Chest affections, Constipation, Enuresis, Eyeaffections, Facial paralyasis, Fracture, Haemorrhage, Injury, Prolapse of Uterus,Rheumatism, Sciatica, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on bones, periosteum, joints, eyes, urinary bladder, uterus and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action on the bones, periosteum and joints produces symptoms of a rheumatic nature, periostitis and exostosis; in the eyes, errors of xaccommodation and vision, alsocauses prolapse of rectum, urinary troubles, metrorrhagia and miscarriage.

CONSTITUTION

There is no particular constitution of the patient as such. However, there are scrofulous exostosis and warts, especially on the palm of the hand.

Relation with heat and cold; Chilly patient.

Miasms: Psora and sycosis are in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Sore, lame, bruised feeling over the entire body, as after a blow, fall or any sort of mechanical injury especially of bones and periosteum.

2. Scrofulous exostosis after injury resulting in irregular growth of periosteum and bone with sore, lame bruised sensation all over the place.

3. Sprains and dislocation as well as fractures of bones come under the domain of this remedy.

4, Lameness and soreness of wrists and ankles after sprain.

6. All parts of the body upon which the patient lies feel lame and bruised (Bapt., Pyro., Ham.).

6. The patient is physically very much restless and tosses and turns in bed to get relief (Rhus tox.).

7. Blow over the eyes resulting in ecchymosis or after using eyes for fine works and straning resulting in blurred vision and aching in the eyes.

8. Prolapse of rectum immediately on ATTEMPTING TO EVACUATE THE BOWEL.

9. Constant feeling of fulness in the urinary bladder even AFTER URINATION.

10. Flat warts on the palms of hand with sore, lame, bruised feeling.

11. Backache relieved by lying flat on the back.

12. Ruta is worse from cold and wet and relieved by motion.

13. Ailments from : Mechanical injuries, bruises, sprains, straining the eyes etc.

PARTICULARS

Eyes:
Causation: Eye troubles are caused by mechanical injuries and overstrain of ocular muscles.

Character of pain: There is severe aching in and over the eyes, with blurred vision as if they had been strained; after fine work, watch making, engraving or looking intensely. AMBLYOP1A ANDASTHENOPIA from over strain of eyes or anomalies of refraction, from overuse in bad light, fine sewing,over-reading at night in dimlight. Consequently there is misty feeling before the eyes, with dim vision,diplopia (Gels. Syphilinum), with complete obscuration of sight at a distance. Eyes burn, ache.red, fee!strained and hot like fire with spasm of lower lids.

Injury :

As a result of mechanical injuries, sprain, bruised injuries, fall or blow, etc. there may
be SCROFULOUS EXOSTOSIS, SPRAINS, PERIOSTITIS, ERYSIPELAS, FRACTURES AND DISLOCATION. There is bruised, lame and sore feeling all over the body which is worse in the limbs and joints.All parts of the body upon which the patient lies are painful as if bruised (Bapt., Phyto., Nux mos.,Ham.). Due to the intolerable pain, the patient is very much restless and, therefore, changes position quitefrequently when lying. Lameness after sprain, especially of WRISTS AND ANKLES.Phthisis after mechanical injuries of chest is also successfully treated by this remedy. Quite often following mechanical injuries, constipation from Inactivity or Impaction may also be dealt
With by this drug.

There may often be severe backache which is relieved by lying on back and in that case, Ruta is the. remedy to be thought of for a camplete cure.

The rectum may be PROLAPSED IMMEDIATELY ON ATTEMPTING A PASSAGE or from slightest stooping or after comfinement with frequent unsuccessful urging, which can be treated by this drug with sure success. Furthermore, trouble of urinary bladder may also be cured by this remedy, the symptoms being pressure on the bladder which is constantly felt. This feeling of pressure continues even after urinating. The patient can hardly retain urine for sometime on account of great urging. In spite of this great urging, if the desire is not obeyed . immediately, it would be difficult afterwards to void the bladder.Urine passes involuntarily. Urine may be scanty and greenish in colour. On the skin, especially on palm of the hands, warts may appear, which are more painful, flat or smooth (Nat. carb., Nat. mur., Anacardium), which may be treated with this remedy.
General Modalities :

Aggravation: Touch, rest, stooping, sitting, ascending, at night, cold weather, while reading and during menses.

Amelioration: Lying on back, rubbing, motion, scratching.

Relations :
Compare: Arn., Arg. nitricum, Conium mac., Euphrasia, phytolacca, Rhus tox., Symphytum. After Arnica, it hastens the curative process in the joints. After Symphytum in injuries of bones.


chapter: 180 SABADILLA

Covadilla Liliaceae

INTRODUCTION

Sabadilla first appears in homoeopathic literature as one of Stapf additions. The drugwas first proved by Samuel Hahnemann. Dr.N.M. Choudhury has justified in calling thisremedy as a great sneezing remedy of ourMateria Medica.

CLINICAL

Coryza. Diphtheria. Hay asthma. Headache.
Influenza. Intermittents. Throat-sore, Tonsillitis, Worms.
SPHERES OF ACTION

It affects the mucous membrane of respiratory tract, lachrymal glands and nerves.

PATHOGENESIS

Acting on mucous membrane of the nose & the lachrymal glands, it produces coryza & symptoms like hay—fever.


CONSTITUTION

Physical make up : It is suited to persons of light hair, fair complexion with a weak, relaxed muscular system.

Relation with heat & cold : Chilly patient.

Miasm : It is an anti-psoric remedy.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Sneezing in spasmodic paroxysms, followed by Lachrymation.
2) Copious watery Coryza with hot flush and red and burning eye lids.
3) Twitching, Convulsion, tremblings and catalepsy, from worms (Cina, Psor.)
4) Illusion :(i) that he is sick.
             Gi) that she is pregnant when only disten-ded with flatus,
             Gii) that parts are shrunken,
             (iv) that she has cancer in throat.
5) Throat symptoms go from left to right.
6) Can swallow warm food more easily.
7) Dryness of fauces and throat.
8) Headache from too much thinking, too close application or attention and from worms.
9) Delirium during intermittants (Podo.)
10) Desire for sweets, hot things and for farinaceous food.
11) Clock like periodicity of Complaints (Cedron).
12) Ailments from: Fright, mental exertion, thinking, worms.
18) Mind : Mentally sabadilla patient is nervous, timid and easily startled. She has erroneous notions about herself. She imagines that she is pregnant when herabdomen is merely distended with flatulence and she has some hor-rible sore throatdisease which will be fatal. The Sabadilla patient also imagines that he is sick andhis parts are shrunken. There is sensation of skin hanging loosely in throat and hemust swallow over it.

PARTICULARS

Headache :
Causation : From too much thinking ; too close application or attention, from worms.
Sensation : There is boring, burning and pressive pain in head with heaviness of head.

Concomittant: Headache with vertigo as if things were turning around him or as if all things were turning around each other. It is accompanied by blackness before eyes and sensation of fainting.

Modalities :
Aggravation: In forenoon, cold, mental exertion, thinking.
Nose :
Being a topmost sneezing remedy it is indicated in hay fever, influenza etc. There is spsmodic paroxysmal sneezing with copious water discharge from nose. Face is hot and eye lids red and burningwith lachrymation. There may be severe pain in frontal region of head with coryza. Influenza with violent spasmodic sneezing and lachrymation on going to open air.

Throat:
Sabadilla is specially indicated in tonsillitis and diphtheria.

Location : Being on the left side and extended to the right side.

Sensation ; Sensation of a skin hanging loosely in throat, must swallow over it. Sensation of a lump in throat with constant necessity to swallow. There is dryness of fauces andthroat, empty swallowing is most painful & patient can swallow warm food more easily. Patient imagines that she has some horrible throat disease that will be fatal.

Modalities:
Aggravation : Cold air, cold food & drinks.
Amelioration : Warm food and drink.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : From cold, cold drinks, forenoon, at regular periods, new & full moon. Amelioration
; Warm food & drink, wrapped up.
Relations :

Complementary: Sepia.

Compare: Colo., Colch., Lyco. where agg. is from 4 P.M. to 8 P.M.

Follows: Bry & Ran. B., well in pleurisy and has cured after Aeon. & Bry. failed.



chapter : 181 SABINA

Savine STAPF 

INTRODUCTION

This drug was first proved by Hahnemann and is one of our important haemorrhagicmedicines. Old school uses the roots of the plantto produce miscarriage. Hahnemann provedit forthe prevention of abortion especially at the thirdmonth. Sabiha may be said to be predominantlyfemale remedy.

CLINICAL

Abortion, Condylomata, Cystitis, Gonorrhoea, Gout, Leucorrhoea, Menstural disorders,Miscarriage, Rheumatism, Skin troubles. Uterineaffection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts especially upon the uterus, serous and fibrous tissues.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes widespread irritation, congestion and inflammation of uterus and serous and fibrous tissues resulting in uterine and rheumatic symptoms.

CONSTITUTION

It is especially suited to chlorotic women, having tendency to miscarriage, particularly in the third month.

Relation with heat and cold: Hot patient.

Miasm: Sycosis is in the background.

Diathesis: Haemorrhagic and gouty diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1. Music is intolerable. (Aconite, Graph., Thuja, Nat. carb., Nat. sulph.) Music produces nervousness and goes through the bone and marrow.

. There is DRAWING PAIN FROM SACRUM TO PUBES in nearly all diseases.

. Ailments after abortion or premature labour.

. Violent pulsation all over the body.

. The patient is hot, disturbed by heat, worse in a warm room, wants doors and windows open and to be ifi the open air.

. Haemorrhages where blood is fluid and clots together.

. Ailments from : Abortion, premature labour, haemorrhage from uterus, retained placenta, etc.

PARTICULARS

Menses :

It is useful in menorrhagia, metrorrhagia or dysmenorrhoea.

Time: Too early.

Quantity: Too profuse.

Duration: Too long lasting.

Character of blood: Flow in paroxysms, which is too protracted. Flow is bright red, liquid and intermingled with clot ie. partly fluid and partly clotted, especially in those ladies who havemenarche very early

Character of pain: During the menses the lady suffers from bearing down, labour-like pain which is drawing in character in small ol back especially FROM SACRUM TO PUBES.

Modality: Aggravation FROM LEAST MOTION, but flow ceases when walking about (Clarke).

Concomitants: Discharges of blood between periods with sexual excitement. The lady gives the history of rheumatism especially in lower limbs. There may also be history of gonorrhoea. Such ladieshave GREAT INTOLERANCE OF MUSIC.

Abortion :

Sabina is especially indicated in those ladies who have menarche very early in their lives having the tendency to miscarriage, abortion, especially at third month (puls., Secale cor., Belladonna) with severepain in the abdomen. There is shooting-pain from back to front, bearing down labour-like pain FROMSACRUM TO PUBES.

During abortion: The striking features in this drug at the time of abortion are flow of liquid, bright ted, copious blood, which is intermingled with clot; in other words, the flow is partly fluid and partlyclotted. This type of symptoms occur over and over again.

After abortion: There is inflammtion of ovaries and uterus after premature labour or abortion. There is violent pain through ovaries and uterus. Aching pain in the back especially in sacrum and thence toPubes as if broken, as if bones were separated (opposite to sepia, where the pain is from front to back).

There is most violent, tearing, throbbing pain with copious haemorrhage accompained by uterine colic, RETAINED PLACENTA, ATONY OF UTERUS, AND VESICULAR MOLE.

At the time of climacteric: At the time of climacteric period the patient has repeated uterine haemorrhage of bright red blood, intermingled with clot and pain from sacrum to pubes. She becomes exhausted and anaemic.

N.B. : The shooting pain from back to front and from sacrum to pubes with hae norrhages are the Striking features of corroborations in abortion and haemorrhage. In abortion, it differs fromBELLADONNA which is also an important remedy for abortion especially at the third month. ButBelladonna has also got the same bearing down pain with bright red blood, followed by expulsion of clot.But the Belladonna state is not like that of Sabina. In Belladonna, there are hyperaesthesia andversensitiveness to touch, jar and motion. The patient will not allow anyone to touch even the nurse.

The bright red blood is very much hot, so hot that it is noticeable, the parts over which blood passes are so sensitive that blood feels intensely hot to her.

Rheumatism :

Sabina is a good drug for rheumatic affections.

Location: Rheumatic pain is usually felt in the anterior portion of thigh.

Character of pain: Shooting type of pain in heels with bruised sensation. Arthritic pain in joints.


Appearance: Gouty nodosities in the joints, swelling of the joints, which is red and shining.

Modalities: Worse in a heated room and better in open air.

Concomitants: Gout alternates with haemorrhage.
Skin :

Fig-warts with intolerable itching and burning with exuberant granulations.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From LEAST MOTION, warm air and room.

Amelioration: In cool, open and fresh air.

Relations :

Antidoted by: Puls.

Complementary to: Thuja.

chapter :182 SAMBUCUS NIGRA


Elder HAHNEMANN Caprifoliaceae

INTRODUCTION

Sambucus nigra is yet another excellent remedy from the vegetable kingdom suitable for respiratory troubles. The mother tincture isprepared from the leaves and flowers. The freshly expressed juice contains viburnic acid and vibriani which produce an unpleasant odour.The trees are found in Central Europe. The inner park as well as the leaves are employed for making ointment for external application. The
flowers are used for fermentation and also for preparing medicated tea. It was proved andadded to Materia Medica Pura by our Master Hahnemann.

CLINICAL

Asthma, Chest oppression of, Goryza, Cough, Croup, Headache, Hoarseness, Perspiration, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main seat of action of Sambucus nigra is the mucous membrane of respiratory organs, nasal passage, larynx, chest and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action on the mucous membrane results in difficult spasm of the respiratory organs, dyspnoea, coryza and suffocative cough. It also produces profuse debilitating sweat, especially during waking hours. In addition, it causes oedematous swellingon various parts of the body particularly legs.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: It is adapted to persons who were formerly robust and fleshy, but suddenly became emaciated; and to the diseases of scrofulous children with affection of the air passage especially,

Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.
Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. There is profuse sweat all over the body DURING WAKING HOURS. When the patient sleeps or closes the eyes, the sweat disappears (rev. of China,    Conium, Thuja. Cactus).
2. The patient has oedematous swelling in various parts of the body, especially in leg, in step and feet.
3. Dry coryza of infants : Nose dry and completely stopped-up, preventing breathing when nursing.
4, There is severe suffocative attack of dyspnoea after mid-night. The patient wakes up suddenly, sits up in bed, and gasps for breath. The    patient becomes cyanosed and turns blue, with livid face. The CHILD CAN INSPIRE WELL BUT CANNOT EXPIRE (Med.).
5. Dry coryza precedes the fever paroxysms.
6. Fever without thirst and the patient dredads uncovering.
7. Aggravation: From sleep and from cold drinks. Amelioration: By pressure.
8. Ailments from : Violent mental emotions, anxiety, grief and excessive sexual indulgence.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory organs :

Sambucus affects especially the mucous membrane of the respiratory organs and following are its cardinal symptoms.

The remedy is indicated in catarrhal affections of the air passages with suffocative attack.

There is DRY CORYZA. The nose is completely dry and stopped up. Breathing through the nose is most difficult, if not impossible, especially while nursing.

The suffocative attack comes particularly after mid-night and the patient is compelled to wake up suddenly and sit up in bed panting for breath; but unable to breathe; turns blue and cyanosed; face becomes livid. The attack passes off after sometime, but again returns after a short while.

The patient can INSPIRE WELL, BUT CANNOT EXPIRE, regular inhalation but sighing expiration. The patient sleeps into attack.

The attack of suffocation is in the last stage of croup. Hoarseness with much tenacious mucus in larynx.

The cough is very much suffocative; hollow, deep coughing, with spasm of the chest. There is much mucus in the bronchi; expectoration is very difficult.

Cough is deep and dry, precedes the fever paroxysms. There is profuse debilitating sweat over the entire body during waking hours;; disappears as soon as the patient sleeps.

Fever :

During fever, there is dry heat while the patient sleeps or on falling asleep. The patient dreads uncovering wants to cover up completely.


Sambucus Nigra 0

There is no thirst during heat or sweat stage. Fever paroxysms are preceded by dry cough. The patient may also have oedematous swelling in parts of the body, especially the legs.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: During rest, after eating fruits,uncovering, after midnight and from 2 to 3 a.m.

Amelioration: Sitting up in bed and motion. Most of the pains occur during rest and disappear while jn motion.

Relations :

Compare: China, Ipecac, and sulphur.

Relieves: Ailments from abuse of Arsenicum.


Follows well: After opium and in bad effects of fright.

chapter : 183 SANGUINARIA CANADENSIS

anne ee
Blood Root G. BUTE Papaveraceae

INTRODUCTION

Blood root is used to be one of the oldest domestic remedies. In winter season, farmers wives would not forget to keep always blood root in their house. In the cold winter days when the coryza comes on, with a cold in the head, chest, throat, then they get hold of the blood root and
make a cup of tea with it which was a routine drug to combat all complaints from cold. Even in this crude form it is used to break up colds.

CLINICAL

Alcholism, Asthma, Breast affection, Bronchitis, Cancer, Catarrh, Chest affection, Cold, Dyspepsia, Headache, Influenza, Menstrual disorders, Pneumonia, Rheumatism, Vomiting, Whooping cough, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Sanguinaria acts chiefly upon the mucous membrane, especially of the respiratory tract. It has marked vasomotor disturbances.

PATHOGENESIS

It irritates the mucous membrane and produces catarrhal inflammation. It also causes derangement of liver and the digestive tract.

CONSTITUTION

Since it is more or less an acute drug, no importance is attached to the constitution as such. The patient is however, CHILLY, with psora in the background, having tubercular diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Highly chilly patient; very much susceptible to cold, even gets affected by a change of weather.

2. It is a right sided remedy. Right sided affections of the whole body e.g., head, chest, lungs, arm, shoulders, etc.

3. There is CIRCUMSCRIBED REDNESS OF THE CHEEKS, especially in the afternoon and the respiratory diseases e.g., in bronchitis, pneumonia,       pulmonary tuberculosis, etc.

4. There is burning sensation as if caused by hot water, especially in the soles and palms during climacteric period (Sulph., Medo., Puls.,       Cham.).
5. Periodic sick headache, sun headache, begins in the morning, increases during the day, lasts until evening and relieved by sleep. Headache       begins in the occiput, ascends to vertex and finally settles over the right eye (Sil., Left eye, Spig.). Headache of climacteric, returns         every seventh day.
6, Rheumatism of the right arm and shoulder (Left-Fer. met., Nux mosch.).

7. Breath and sputa are very offensive, even the patient himself feels the bad smell.

8. Dry hacking cough, waking the patient up at night and not ceasing until he sits upin bed and passes flatus, with CIRCUMSCRIBED RED CHEEKS and    night sweat. Sudden stoppage of cough brings on diarrhoea.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Location: Right sided headache. Headache begins in the occiput, spreads upwards and settles over
the right eye (Sil—Left orbit, Spig.).

Sensation : As if head would burst or as if eyes would be pressed out.

Character of headache: Periodic sick headache, returns at the climacteric, every seventh day: sun headache.

Throbbing, pulsating and congestive headache.

Modalities:

 Aggravation: Begins in the morning, increases during the day, lasts until evening.

 Amelioration: By sleep and by perfectly lying quiet in a dark room.

Concomitants: Neuralgia of face; pain extends to all directions from the upper jaw; relieved by kneeling down and pressing the head firmly against the floor.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Nose : Catarrhal affection of the nose. Nose filled up with mucus and blocked up. From nese, there is a profuse, thick, yellowish discharge coming out. Nasal polyp (Psor., Allium cepa, Teuc. m.v.)

Cough :

Causation: From taking cold, from draught of cold air, change of weather, after whooping cough.

Location: Right side of the chest is affected most.

Sensation: Burning and sorness in chest.

Character of cough: Spasmodic cough with gagging and vomiting.

Cough of gastric origin; every cough ends in belching. Severe pain in the larynx and trachea when talking. Severe cough, especially at night, making the patient get up and not ceasing until he sits upin bed and passes flatus.With cough there is thick, yellowish, offensive sputa being coughed out.




Modalities:

 Aggravation: From slightest cold, draught of air and at night.

 Amelioration: By sitting up in bed and by passing flatus.

Concomitants: With cough there is false plethora i.e., CIRCUMSCRIBED REDNESS OF THE CHEEKS in afternoon.

Pneumonia :

Stage: In resolution stage of pneumonia Sanguinaria is well indicated.

Location: When the right lung is affected (middle lobe).

Sensation: Tickling behind the sternum causes a constant hacking cough, with burning and soreness in the chest.

Character of Cough: Violent cough; every cough is felt at the bifurcation of trachea. After cough there is copious loud eructation, violent cough at night makes the patient get up.

Character of Sputa: Thick, yellowish, offensive, purulent. There may be haemoptysis with rusty coloured spiitum.

Modalities: Aggrauafion: At night, from lying down, cold.

Amelioration: By passing flatus and lying on back.

Concomitants: With cough there is CIRCUMSCRIBED REDNESS OF CHEEKS. ESPECIALLY IN THE AFTERNOON.

Reheumatism :

Causation: After exposure to cold the patient cannot raise the arm. It hangs by his side.

Location: Rheumatism of right arm, shoulder and dehojd (Left, Ferrum, Nux. mosch. and both arms Med., Rhus. tox.).

Character of pain: Drawing, tearing, pain in places which are least covered by flesh e.g.. tibia.back gf hands, etq.

Modalities: Aggravation ; From cold, at night, and from motion.

Rheumatism of right shoulder and deltoid.
General Modalities :

Aggravation:; From cold.-draught of air, change of weather and right side.

Amelioration: Headache relieved by sleep. Cough is relieved by passing flatus.

Relations :

Complementary to: Antim. tart.

It antidotes: Opium.



chapter: 184 SANICULA

Mineral spring Water Dr. J.G. GUNDLACH

INTRODUCTION

From water of a mineral spring of Ottawa, proved, as to its deleterious effects by Dr. J.G. Gundlach who, with his family drank it for more
than a year, and who was still suffering from its effects five years later. The evaporated, triturated and potentised salt, was proved in the
usual way under the auspices of the American doctor, Sherbina. Sanicula is chiefly the children’s remedy of our materia medica. It is a
deep acting, constitutional polychrest remedy and should be prescribed in higher potencies.

Clinical: Car sickness. Constipation. Dandruff. Diarrhoea. Emaciation. Excoriations. Foot sweat. Indigestion. Leucorrhoea. Marasmus. Ossification too early. Prolapse of Uterus. Vomiting. Urine & Faeces-in-continence of.

SPHERE OF ACTION

It has action all over the body especially gastrointestinal tract, nervous system, female sexual organs & skin,

CONSTITUTION

Physical make up—Sanicula child looks old, dirty, greasy & brownish. Skin about neck wrinkled, hangs in folds, scaly dandruff on scalp, eyebrows and beard.

Heat cold relation—Not stamping.
Temperament—Mentally head strong and obstinate.
Miasm—Psoric & Sycotic miasms are in the background.
Diathesis—Scrofulous, diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Dread of downward motion (Bor.)
2) Child headstrong, obstinate, cries and kicks ; does not want to be touched.
3) Head & neck sweat profusely and while sleeping wets pillow far around (Cale., Sil.)
4) Premature ossification of bones.
5) Tongue : Large, flabby, burning, must protrude it to keep it cool; ringworm on tongue (Nat. M.)
6) Thirst: Drinks little and often ; is vomited as soon as it reaches the stomach (Ars., Phos.)
7) Constantly changing his occupation.
8) Nausea .and vomiting from carriage riding.
9) The odour of stool follows despite bathing (Sulph.)
10) Child keeps off clothing even in coldest weather (Hep., Sulph.)
11) Foot sweat between the toes, making them sore, offen-sive ; on soles as if he had stepped in cold water.
12) Excoriation of skin about anus (Sulph.) covering perineum and extending to genitals.
18) Constipation : No desire until a large accumulation ; stool partially expelled and recedes (Sil., Thuja).
14) Diarrhoea : Changeable in character and colour, frothy, grass green, turns green on standing.
15) Burning of soles of feet ; must uncover or put them in a cool place (Lach., Medo., Sang., Sulph.)
16) Ailments from : Strains, jarring.
17) Mind—Sanicula child is mentally headstrong and obsti-nate, He cries & kicks. He is cross, irritable but his irritation quickly alternates with laughter. Child does notwant to be touched. Sanicula patient constantly changes occu-pation. He lacksenergy and is forgetful depressed and restless. He fears darkness and is afraid ofimpending misfortune is easily upset by slight word or act.

PARTICULARS

Gastrointestinal Symptoms

Mouth : Tongue is large flabby and burning, must protrude to keep it cool. Ringworm on the tongue.

Stomach : Stomach is disordered from jarrying. Nausea & vomiting from carriage riding. Thirst for little quantity of water very often. Water is vomited as soon as it reaches the stomach. Appetite isincreased, hungry before meals. He craves fat, bacon & salt.

Rectal Symptoms :

Constipation : In Sanicula there is no desire until a large accumulation ; after great straining stool partially expelled, recedes back again (Sil., Thuja.) Crumbling at verge of anus (Mag M.) ; large evacuationof small dry, gray balls, must be removed mechanically. (Sil. Calc.) stool is hard, impossible to evacuate ;of grayish white balls, like burnt lime and with the odour of limburger cheese.

Diarrhoea : Changeable in character and colour. Stool is frothy, grass green, turns green on standing. It looks like scrambled egg or scum of a frogpond. (Helb, Mag carb) After eating patient musthurry from table. The odour of stool follows despite bathing (Sulph.) No. amount of washing can makehim get rid of it. Incontinence of faecs and urine. Sphincters unreliable so there is urging from flatus,patient must cross legs to prevent faeces escaping. Female genital symptoms : It acts on female genital
organs producing leucorrhoea and prolapsus uteri. Leucorrhoea with strong odour offish brine is acharacteristic symptom of sanicula.

Prolapsus of Uterus : Weakness, bearing down as if contents of pelvis would escape. She desires to support parts by placing hand against vulva. (Lil., Mur.). Soreness of uterus & vagina feels large.

Modalities :

Aggravation :Walking misstep or jar.

Amelioration : By rest, lying down.

Skin :

Skin of Sanicula patient is dirty, greasy, brownish & wrinkled. Skin about neck is wrinkled & hangs in folds (Abrp., lod., Nat. M., Sars.) Due to wrinkling, child looks old. Profuse, scaly dandruff on scalp,eyebrows, and beard. There is soreness behind ears with discharge of white gray, viscid fluid (Graph.,Psor.) Excoriation of skin about anus (Sulph.)., covering perineum and extending to genitals. Sweat ofsanicula is very characteristic. Head & neck of children sweat profusely during sleep, wets the pillow fararound. (Gal., Sil.) Foot sweat is very offensive & acrid causing soreness between the toes. Sweat on solesas if he had stepped in cold water. Burning of soles of feet; patient must uncover or put them in a coolplace (Lach., Medo., Sang. Sulph.)

Modalities :

Agg. : In warm room ; by scratching.

Baby : Look of the baby — Sanicula baby looks old, dirty, greasy & brownish, skin about neck wrinkled, hangs in folds. Child is emaciated. Baby        has scrofulous diathesis.

Mind : Mentally child is headstrong., obstinate, cries & kicks. He is cross, irritable, does not want to be touched and has dread of downward        motion.

Tongue : Large, flabby, burning ; must protrude it to keep it cool, ringworm of tongue.

Thirst: Child drinks little & often ; is vomited as soon as it reaches the stomach.

Sweat: Head & neck of child sweat profusely while sleep-ing wetting the pillow far around. Child also has offensive foot sweat, between toes        making them sore. Sweat on soles, as if he had stepped incold water.

Stool: Child may be constipated or diarrhoeic but the odour of stool follows despite bathing.

Constipation : There is large evacuation of small dry, gray balls, must be removed mechanically. After great straining stool partially expelled & recedes.

Diarrhoea : In diarrhoea stool is changeable in character & colour. It is frothy, grass green like scum.of a frog pond.

Skin : There is excoriation of skin about anus Governing perineum & extending to genitals. Child has soreness behind ears with discharge of white gray viscid fluid. In emaciation, skin of face looks dirty,greasy & brownish. Skin about neck wrinkled & hangs in folds.

Relations:

Compare : Abrot., Alum., Gale., Sil., Sulph.

chapter: 185 SARSAPARILLA

Wild Liquorice HAHNEMANN Smilaceae

INTRODUCTION

Sarsaparilla is a wonderful medicine for the urinary troubles of peculiar characteristicsymptoms. The mother tincture is prepared fromthe dried root. It is also a kind of restorative afteran exhausting course of mercury. Hahnemann’sprovings have amply justified the above facts.

CLINICAL

Asthma, Bladder affection, Bone affections, Breast affections, Bright’s disease, Catarrh,Constipation, Fever, Gonorrhoea, Gout, Gravel,Headache, Herpes, Rheumatism, Skin troubles,Urinary disease, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts on urinary organs, genitals, rectum, skin, bones, and right lower part of the body.

PATHOGENESIS

It acts on kidney and urinary organs producing renal colic, renal and bladder stone and consequential urinary troubles. It also acts on skin causing various kinds oferuptions, rash, cracks and fissures. Furthermore, rheumatic affections, periostea! pains,etc. are also within the range of its action.

CONSTITUTION

Look of the patient: Lean, thin and debilitated persons with dark hair and shrivelled skin which lies loose in folds. In children the face looks like that of an old man withenlarged abdomen, dry and flabby skin, with various skin eruptions and cracks andfissures, especially in hands and feet.

Relation with heat and cold: Easily affected by cold in general.

Miasm: It covers all the three miasms, psora, syphilis and sycosis.

Diathesis: LITHIC and scrofulous.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. It is a RIGHT SIDED REMEDY (Lyco., Caust., Sang., Bry., Kali. carb.).

2. THERE IS SEVERE, UNBEARABLE PAIN AT THE CONCLUSION OF URINATION, just as urine ceases to flow (Berb. vulgaris, Med., Thuja).

3. Inability to pass urine freely except in the standing position, when sitting in only dribbles.

4, Passage of white sand in urine is very characteristic of this remedy (Red sand Lycopodium).

5. Air passes from the urethra.

6. Retraction of nipples or flattening of nipples in nursing women (Silicea, Hydrastis).

7, Herpetic eruptions on all parts of the body, rashes, cracks, and fissures, especially in hands and feet.

8. Rheumatic affections following suppressed gonorrhoea or abuse of mercury.

9, Ailment from : Abuse ot mercury, syphilis or suppressed gonorrhoea.

PARTICULARS

Urinary symptoms :
Sarsaparilla is an excellent remedy for the urinary troubles brought on or aggravated by abuse of mercury, due to syphilis or gonorrhoea, the cardinal symptoms of which are as follow :-

There is severe, almost UNBEARABLE PAIN AT THE CONCLUSION OF URINATION just as urineceases to flow (Berb., Med., Thuja). Quite frequently, passage of gravel or or small calculi and white sand in urine, or on diaper (brownsand, Phos., red sand, Lyco.).Right sided renal colic: There is excruciating pain from the right kidney to downwards (Lyco.). Child screams and cries before and during passing urine due to pain caused by the passage of small stones (Bor., Lyco.).

Urine may be scanty or copious, bloody or bright and clear, but irritating; flaky and sandy;
Passes without any sensation (Caust., Arg nit.).

There is painful distention, and tenderness in the bladder.

Urine dribbles while sitting, passes freely while standing.

Air passes from the urethra.

Modalities: Sitting and motion aggravate many symptoms.

Amelioration: By standing and rest.

There is an intolerable bad smell (stench) on genital organs with bloody seminal emission and fluid Pollutions.

Skin :

Sarsaparilla is a very good remedy for the skin troubles caused by psora, mercurial, syphilitic or Sonorrhoea! affections, if following symptoms are found.

Skin is loose, shrivelled or lies infolds and flabby. The skin is hard and indurated.

There are herpetic eruptions on all parts of the body; ulcers after abuse of mercury in syphilis.

From the exposure to open air there may be rash and dry itch like eruptions, which are prone to appear in spring and they are generally crusty.

Itching eruption appears on forehead during menses (Dulc., Con., Sang., Psor.). Moist eruption in right groin before menses.

Nipples are retracted, small, withered and unexcitable (Silicea, Hydrastis). Cracks and fissures (Rhagades) appear on hands.

Sarsaparilla is also suitable for headache and periosteal pain usually from abuse of mercury, syphilis
or suppressed gonorrhoea.

Furthermore, for rehumatic affections caused due to gonorrhoea, checked by cold, wet weather or by mercury, with severe bone pains which, are aggravated at night, in damp weather or after taking coldwater. Sarsaparilla is to be thought of as an effective remedy.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: By touch, pressure, motion, going upstairs and washing.

Amelioration: By warmth,.rest, cold diet and loosening garments.

Relations :

Complementary to: Mercury, Sepia either of which follows well.

Compare: Berb. Vulgaris, Lyco., Nat. mur and Phosphorus.

Frequently called for after abuse of mercury.



chapter: 186 SECALE CORNUTUM

Spurred Rye NO PROVING

INTRODUCTION

This is a remedy obtained from one of the poisonous plants—Fungi—which was used ingood old days as an abortificient. It is still inpractice in some of the rural areas where illegalabortions are in vogue. In the Homoeopathicworld, it was HALE, who introduced thispoisonous fungi as a reliable therapeutic tool.

CLINICAL

Abrotion, After pains, Bladder affections,Paralysis, Boils, Carbuncles, Cholera, Convulsion,Cramps, Diabetes, Diarrhoea, Epilepsy, Gangrene,Glandular affection, Haemorrhage, Heartaffection, Liver troubles, Leucorrhoea, Labour,Menstrual disorders, Miscarriage, Neuralgia,Numbness, Pregnancy disorders, Spinal irritation,Skin affection, Ulcers, Uterine troubles, Urinarytroubles, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

AF ungus: A Nosode

Secale cor., acts powerfully upon the cerebro-spinal nervous system, unstriped muscle, uterine muscle, arterioles, capiHaries and blood.

PATHOGENESIS

While acting upon the central nervous system, it produces convulsions and ergotism. On coats of arterioles it leads to persistent contractions diminishing their calibre andthus reducing the blood flow. Later on, it is followed by dilatation, thereby leading toblood stasis resulting in coldness of the parts. Blood coagulability is diminished, hence the haemorrhage.


CONSTITUTION

Make up of the body: The patien is thin, scrawny, feeble, cachectic and of pale appearance with sunken countenance. Very old, decrepit and feeble persons. Female patients are of very lax muscular fibre; everything seems loose and open. Temperament: Irritable persons; cross at very trifling talks. Idest words offend. Nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: HOT patient. Though the skin feels cold to touch, the patient cannot tolerate covering.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: HAEMORRHAGIC DIATHESIS The slightest wound causes bleeding for weeks (Phos., Lachesis); discharge of sanious fluid; blood with a strong tendendy to putrescence; tingling in the limbs and great debility; especially when the weakness is not caused by previous loss of fluids.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Skin feels cold to touch, yet the patient cannot tolerate covering (Camphor,Med.,) icy coldness of extremities.

2. Relaxation and weakness of every part of the organ, like uterus, particularly the smoothness leading to atonic activity, prolonging the    labour.

3. Burning in all parts of the body as if sparks of fire were falling on the patient (Ars.).

4. Haemorrhage (a) continuously oozing, (b) passive type and (c) character of blood is thin, foetid watery, black, discharge of sanious liquid;      blood with a strong tendency to putrescence.

5. Great debility accompanying various disorders. After haemorrhage, boils, diarrhoea etc.

6. Craves acids and lemonade, aversion to fat and. meat.

7. Extensor type of cramps in the fingers and toes, during cholera (rev—Cup. met.).

8. Boils which are slowly maturing, very debilitating, having an unaccountable pain and sensitiveness. They contain some green pus-like fluid       (Tuberculinum).

9. The right side is predominantly affected.

10. Modality :

(a) Though the skin is cold—icy cold—to touch, the complaints are BETTER BY COLD APPLICATION, UNCOVERING THE PARTS AND AGGRAVATED BYHEAT, WARM     APPLICATION AND COVERING (rev. of Arsenic).

(b) There is great aversion to heat. Aggravation from heat, warmth, and covering.

11. Mind : There is great anguish with fear of death. Fear with desire to jump into water. The patient has madness with’inclination to bite.     Weakness of intellectualfaculties is well marked. Loss of consciousness or consciousness seems to continueto the last breath and just before     death, it seems as though the patient wouldimprove.

12. Ailments from : Sexual excess, suppression of tears, lochia, milk, sweat, etc.


PARTICULARS

Face :Face is pale, pinched, sunken, with sunken eyes and surrounded by blue margins, spasmodic distortion of the whole face with liver spots.
      secale Gornutum 

Gastro-intestinal symptioms :

Abdomen ; Abdomen is very sensitive to touch (Lach.). There is burning sensation all over the abdomen, especially in the stomach. Tympanitic condition of the abdomen with immense flatulence is wellmarked.

Stomach : There is unnatural ravenous appetite even with exhausting diarrhoea. The patient craves for acids and lemonade; desires bread and undiluted wine. Aversion to food, drinks and heat.

There is unquenchable thirst for large quantities of very cold water. Constant eructation with bad odour. There may be vomiting of bilious matter, mucus, dark brown, coffee ground fluid or all the foodand drink.

Diarrhoea : During diarrhoea, there is icy coldness of the parts; yet the patient does not like covering. Intolerance of being covered with great exhaustion is well marked.

Charater of stool: Profuse, watery, painless, involuntary, stool passes with great force. Putrid stool of olive green colour and stained with- blood. Anus remains wide open.

Cholera :

Causation : Summer weather, suppression of discharges, like sweat, etc.

During cholera there is icollapsed condition with COLD SKIN YET CANNOT BEAR TO BE COVERED; EXTENSOR TYPE OF CRAMPS and very cold extremities. Along with profuse diarrhoea,there is persistent vomiting.

Character of stool: Profuse, watery, foetid, brown, discharged with great force, very exhausting; involuntary as though the anus remains wide open (Apis., Phos.).

Concomitants: Face is pale, pinched, ashy, sunken, hippocratic, drawn with blue rings around the eyes.

Pulse: Small, rapid, contracted and often intermittent. There is unnatural ravenous appetite with exhausting diarrhoea. Craving for acids and lemonade.

Modality: Aggravation from heat and amelioration from cold.

Urine :

Enuresis of old people is often treated with this remedy. Urine is pale, watery or bloody. There may also be sometimes suppressed urine.

Menses :

Secale coor. is a good drug for menstrual troubles, having peculiar symptoms which are as follows:

Time: Irregularly regular.

Duration: Long lasting.

Quantity: Copious.

Character of blood; Dark blood, continuous oozing of watery blood until the next period.

Concomitants; Menstrual colic, labour-like pain with coldness and intolerance of heat in scrawny, feeble and cachectic woman.

All symptoms are aggravated just before menses.

Leucorrhoea :

May be greenish, brownish, and offensive.

Labour :
During labour: There is irregular pain, which is too weak, feeble and ceasing occasionally.

Everything seems to be loose and open, but no expulsive action. There may be fainting attacks during labour.

After pains: Too long, too painful, hour-glass contraction.

Breasts: Suppression of milk in thin, lean and exhausted woman. Breast is small and does not fill in properly.

Abortion : Secale cor, is a wonderful drug for treatment of cases especially of threatened abortion at third month.

Causation: Lifting, straining and hard labour.

Threatened abortion, especially at third month. There may be prolonged, bearing down, forcing pains with other generalities.

Gangrene: Dry, senile, following injury, with bumning as if sparks of fire were falling on the parts affected.

There is aggravation from external heat and relief by cold application in spite of coldness of the parts. There may appear blisters at the commencement of gangrene.. Large ecchymosis and blood blisters. Skinfeels cold to touch, yet the patient cannot tolerate any covering. There is icy coldness of the extremities.Skin of the face looks pale, pinched, ashy, with sunken eyes, blue rings around the eyes. Skin hangs infolds as if very loose.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: FROM COVERING WORSE FROM HEAT, WARM APPLICATION, WARM DRINKS. after eating and from touching.

Amelioration: In the open air, getting cold, uncovering, exposing the affected parts, rubbing, wants to be fanned, cold application and open air.
Relations :

Antidoted by: Camphor, Opium.

Compatible: Arsenic, Aconite, Belladonna, Mercurius, Pulsatilla.

Compare: Medorrhinum, Camphor.




chapter : 187 SELENIUM


Selenium HERING The element

INTRODUCTION

Selenium, an element, was first discovered in 1818 by Berzelium. In homoeopathy it wasintroduced and proved by Dr. Hering. Selenium
is a constant constituent of bones and teeth. It isone of the topmost remedies for sexual weakness.

WINE RELATION

Clinical: Alcoholism, Aphonia, Constipation, Debility, Hair falling out, Headache, Hoarseness,Impotency, Laryngitis, Liver-affection _ of,Priaprism, Pros-iatitis, Prostatorrhoea, Psoriasis.Spermatorrhoea.

Constitution & physical make-up : Adapted to light complex-ion & blondes ; there may be great emaciation of face, hands, legs and feet or single parts.

Relation with heat and cold : Hot patient. Complaints aggra-vate from hot weather but patient sensitive to draft of air also. Miasm : Syphilis : and Psora.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Great weakness, weak, easily exhausted from either men-tal or physical labour after typhoid, typhus, debauchery.

2) Irresistible desire to lie down and sleep, strength sud-denly leaves him ; especially in hot wether.

3) Very forgetful in business, but during sleep dreams of what he had forgotten.

4) Very great aversion to draft of air-either cold, damp or warm.

5) Longing for spirituous liquors, an almost irresistible, maniacal desire; hungry at night (Cina, Psor).

6) Hair falls off: on head, eyebrows, whiskers, genitals.

7) Constipation: Stool large hard, impacted, so tHat it requires mechanical aid (Aloe, Cale, Sani, Sep, Sil).

8) Urine dribbles involuntarily, while walkhig. Urine is dark, red & scanty with coarse, red, sandy sediment.

9) Impotency with lewd thoughts & desire, but physically impotent.

10) Involuntary dribbling of semen and prostatic fluid which oozes while sitting, at stool, during sleep.

11) Coryza ending in diarrhoea (Sang. Can.)

12) Headache every afternoon, of drunkards, after debauchery, lemonade, tea, wine.

13) Aphonia after long use of voice.

14) Emaciation of affected parts.

15) Ailments from : Alcohol, tea, lemonade, Debauchery, Loss of fluids, Masturbation, Exertion.

16) Mind : Selenium patient is very forgetful in business, but during sleep dreams of what he had forgotten.

He is extremely sad, abject, despairing, uncompromising, melancholic. Mental labour fatigues him. Lascivious thoughts with impotency.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation : Debauchery. Tea. Lemonade. Wine.

Location : Pain over left eye.

Character of headache:

There is violent attacks of lancinating pains in head above left eye with desire to lie down. Head-ache every afternoon; Headache in old drunkards.

Modality :

Aggravation:Walking in the sun, strong odours, tea.

Gastrointestinal Symptoms :

Throat : Selenium is a very useful remedy in hoarseness, aphonia even in incipient tubercular laryngitis. Aphonia after long use of voice. Voice is husky when beginning to sing, there is hawking& raising of transparent lumps of mucus like a starch. Patient must clear throat frequently. There may becough in the morning with bloody expectoration.

Stomach : Causation of stomach ailments : Sugar, Salt food, tea, lemonade.

Longing for spirituous liquors,—an almost maniacal desire. Sweetish taste in mouth with thick white coating of tongue in the morning. Hiccough and eructations after smoking. There is pressure in thestomach as if cramp would occur. Hunger at night.

Abdomen : Chronic liver affections with painful enlarged liver and fine rash over liver region.

Constipation : Causation : Constipation after serious illness especially enteric fevers. Stool is hard, large and is very much impacted. Stool                has to be removed mechanically.

Male Sexual symptoms

This remedy has a very marked action on male genital system and is quiet a favourite remedy with homoeopaths for the ills and abuses of sexual system such as impotency, spermatorrhoea, prostatorrhoea,priapism etc. Debility—weakness of sexual organs is a characteristic feature. There is desire, lewdthoughts but the patient is physically impotent. It increases desire, decreases ability. Loss of sexualpower with lascivious fancies. Erections slow, insufficient, too rapid emission with long continued thrill.


He is weak, ill humoured after coitus. There is involuntary dribbling of semen & prostatic fluid which oozes while sitting, at stool, during sleep. It can be thought of in priapism where glands are drawn up.

It can be compared with Agnus Castus, Caladium, Calc, Garb, Conium, Lycopodium, phos. acid,  staphy etc.

Agnus Castus : In Agnus there is complete impotency usually resulted from frequent attacks of orrhoea after abuse of sexual power. Patient is prematurely old from seminal losses. There is relaxation,flacidity, coldness of genitals. No sexual power or desire. Even voluptuous- fancies excite no erection.Melancholia, apathy, mental torpor, self-contempt and general debility are characteristic features of AgnusCas-tus.

Caladium : It is preferable in advance cases of sexual weakness. Impotency with mental depression; penis is relaxed with sexual desire and excitement. There is no erection even after caress, no emission,no orgasm during an embrance.

Calc-Carb : It typifies the bad effects of early masturbation. Every coitus is followed by weakness of mind & body. Ejaculation is tardy and unusual weakness follows indulgence. Conium Mac—tt is a greatremedy for impotency from excessive sexual indulgence and also the remedy for bad effects that arise outof suppression of sexual desires, especially in aged, old peoples.

Lycopodium : It is suited to impotence of young as well as old men. Impotency from onanism or sexual excess; penis is small, cold, relaxed. In old men there is strong desire but imperfect erections.Patient falls asleep during an embrace. There may be premature emission.

Phos acid : This too is a remedy for impotency, when the patient suffers from nightly pollutions— sometimes several in one night. There is frequent, profuse and debilitating emissions, Desire increasedafter coitus. The patient is mentally sad, abashed, despair of cure. In onanism, too, patient is greatlydistressed by the culpability of the act.

Staphysagria : This is a good remedy for spermatorrhoea after masturbation with sunken features, guilty, abashed look. Seminal emission is followed by backache, weakness, and relaxation or atrophy ofsexual organs. Patient is highly irritable and persistently dwelling on sexual subjects; Con-stantly thinkingof sexual pleasures.

Skin

Hair falls out from brows, beard, and genitals. Dry scaly eruption on palms, with itching. Itching about the ankles and folds of skin, between fingers. Itching about finger joints and between fingers, onpalms. Vesicular eruption between fingers. Comedones with an oily surface of the skin. Acne, Itchchecked by mercurials or sulphur oftern requires selenium.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : Draft of air, in the sun, from lemonade, tea or wine.

Amelioration : Taking cold water or cold air into the mouth.

Relation :

Compare : Phos. in genito-urinary and respiratory symptoms, Arg. m. and Stan, in laryngitis of singers or speakers. Alum, hard stool, inactive rectum.

Follows well : After, calad, Nat, staphy, phos, acid in sexual weakness.


chapter: 188 SEPIA


Cuttle Fish HAHNEMANN Mallusca

INTRODUCTION

Popularly known as the “Washer Woman’s remedy”. Sepia is one of the greatestcontributions to Homoeopathy, by Master
Hahnemann.

The crude substance for preparation of this wonderful constitutional remedy is a liquidcontained in the ‘INK BAG?’ of the Cuttle fish.This brownish black substance is ejected out bythe fish from its gland to protect itself from anyexternal aggression. A very small insignificantquantity of this ink is capable of making thewhole water around the fish completely dark sothat the enemy would get confused arid lose sight of the fish and thus it can ascapeunhurt. The drug substance thus possesses the great potential power in its inherent,dormant and latent state which when aroused is capable of curing a variety of diseases,particularly chronic, in nature in the same way as the cuttle-fish protects itself from anydangerous enemy.

Hahnemann got the clue to initiate proving of this remedy from a patient, who was in the regular habit of wetting his brush containing Indian Ink with his own saliva. Everytime he did so, a very small portion of the ink would naturally find its way into thestomach to be absorbed by the system. By and by, he developed certain chronic ailments.Hahnemann treated him with all the then known similimums to he best of his skill andability but without any appreciable benefit. Excepting that his habit of wetting his brushwith his own saliva and consequent affection of the ink, would have been the maintainingcause, the artist was advised to discontinue with his profession. The artist obeyed him andhe was completely redeemed of all his chronic ailments. This unique pleasant experienceultimately led him to prove Sepia for the benefit of generations of mankind.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Amenorrhoea, Apoplexy, Asthma, Cough, Cancer, Dyspepsia,Eczema, Eye affection, Female genital organs, Gout, Gonorrhoea, Headache, Jaundice,Leucorrhoea, Liver affection, Preganancy, Psoriasis, Prolapse of uterus, Ptosis, Sciatica,Toothache, Urinary troubles, Uterus bearing down, Varicose veins, Whooping cough, ete.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Sepia acts of female genital organs, gastrointestinal tract, liver and portal system,skin, glands and nervous system.



PATHOGENESIS

Affecting the female genital organs, Sepia diminishes the general energy of the vegetative sphere and it produces venous congestion; gastro-ihtestinal disorders, setting in much relaxation, fatigue, exhaustion, impaired liver secretion and herpetic eruptions.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Weakpersons with yellow, earthy complexion, discolouration and desquamation, shallow skin, yellowishness of the face and conjunctiva, yellow spotson the chest, a “tell tale face” to indicate the internalderangement just like a recordingclock, “moth-spots” cachectic yellow face, with yellow saddle across the nose, with MALETYPE OF PELVIS in women.

Temperament: Nervous temparament.

Relation with heat and cold: Very chilly patient.

Miasm: It is anti-psoric and anti-sycotic.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Lack of vital heat, especially in chronic diseases.

2. Weakness and bearing down sensation; must sit close and cross her legs to prevent something from coming down the vagina (Murex).

3. Pains extends from other parts to the back.Painful sensation of emptiness, “ALL GONE FEELING IN THE STOMACH RELIEVED BY EATING.

4. Sense of fulness in the pelvic organs and pressure down into the anus.

5. Sensation of a ball in inner parts.

6. Flushes of heat and perspiration.

7. General relaxation, weak, faint, empty feeling while kneeling at church.

8. Dyspnoea aggravated by sitting, after sleep in room, but relieved by dancing or walking rapidly.

9. Very sensitive to cold air “CHILLS SO EASILY”.

10. Drooping of eye-lids with catarrhal discharge (Gels, Rhus tox., Causticum, Caulophyllum).COON AM

11. Faints easily from extremes of heat and cold.

12. Desire for acids, vinegar, pickles, sweets, to be let alone, bread, butter, soup, wine, spicy, pungent and bitter things. Aversion to smell     of food, milk, tobacco and meat.

13. The sight or even the thought of food sickens; the smell of cooking food nauseates (Ars., Colchicum, Stannum met.).

14. Mind : Sepia patient manifests some peculiar and striking mental conditions which are as follows: - a nlas The patient is excessively nervous. “Indifference” runs through the whole drug; indifferent to everything, to her own occupation, to members of her own family WHOM she loved best once, to her owndomestic and personal affairs. The patient is very much irritable and easilyoffended. SHE CANNOT NARRATE HER SYMPTOMS WITHOUT WEEPING.(Puls., Med.). She is indolent, does not want to do anything; either to work or to play, even cannot afford to think.

She is anxious and fearful, flushes of heat over the face and head. Thinks about evils, real or imaginary, towards the evening. The patient always has GREATSADNESS AND WEEPING. There is also great dread of being alone, of men, ofmeeting friends.

She cannot bear tobacco in any form. There is great intolerance of tobacco. She isvery greedy and miserly, absent-minded, memory is very weak, unable to recollectthoughts.

Consolation aggravates her mental condition. “The disposition peculiar to Sepia is A DEPRESSED, ANXIOUS AND FEARFUL STATE OF MIND WITH A SENSE OFHELPLESSNESS AND YET SUSCEPTIBILITY TO EXCITEMENT AND STILLMORE TO TERROR, FREQUENT ATTACKS OF WEEPING AND DESPAIR OFLIFE.” SAYS DUNHAM.

16. Ailments from : Exposure to cold, laundry work, alcohol, tobacco, wetting beforeand during menses, after eating, going upstairs, coitus,     change of weather, fromcold air, milk, acids, fats and before thunderstorm.
 
PARTICULARS

Head :

There is rush of blood to head.

Vertigo with sensation of something rolling around in head.

There is violent pressive headache in terrible shocks at menstrual nisus, with scanty flow: sensation as if head would burst.

Great falling of hair, after chronic headache at the climacteric period.

Headache of delicate sensitive and hysterical women, Pressing and bursting headache, aggravated by stooping, mental labour and relieved by external pressure and continued motion.

Herpes behind ears, on nape of neck, pain as if from subcutaneous ulceration, swelling, eruption on external ear.

Stomach :

Feeling of emptiness, all-gone sensation in the pit of stomach, relieved by eating. Nausea and vomiting at smell or sight and even thought of food. Nausea worse when lying on side and nausea from tobacco smoking. Nausea in the morning before eating. There is burning in pit of stomach. Everything tastes too salty.


There is great avertion to food, particularly to meat and fat, to bread, especially during pregnancy; to milk, which causes diarrhoea (Nat. carb.).

Flatulent abdomen with headache.

The liver is sore and painful, relieved by lying on right side. There are many brown spots on abdomen.

Feeling of relaxation and hearing down in abdomen. There is also pressure in abdomen as though the contents would issue through the genital organs. Feeling of weight in epigastrium, distension andrumbling in abdomen, rolling in abdomen as if something alive were moving (Thuja, Crocus, Ver. alb.,Sulphur).

Rectum and stool :

There is bleeding at stool and fulnes of rectum.

Constipation: Stool is large and hard; sensation of a ball in the rectum. The patient cannot strain due to gret tenesmus and pain which shoots upwards. Character of stool: Stool is dark brown in round balls, glued together with mucus and even soft stool is voided with great difficulty. There is almost constant oozing of mucus from the anus. There may also be infantile diarrhoea, which is worse from boiled milk in children.

During pregnancy, there may be obstinate constipation, slow and difficult discharge even of soft stool, with excessive straining.
Sensation of a weight or ball felt in anus, not relieved by passing stool.

Urine :

In the urine, sand may be present. The charater of the sand is red, adhesive or clay coloured. In children there is involuntary urination during the first sleep (Kreosote).

Chronic cystitis with slow micturition can be successfully treated with Sepia. While passing urine. there is bearing down sensation. Urine is so offensive that it must be remoued from the room atonce.

There may also be gleet which is painless, yellowish and staining the linen; external meatus glued together in the morning. Gleet of long standing. Sexual organs are weak and exhausted.

Female Genital Organs :

Menses : All kinds of menstrual irregularities are found in Sepia i.e. early, scanty, profuse, amenorrhoea, menorrhagia and metrorrhagia. When it is associated with other uterine and genital symptoms and the typical Sepia picture, Sepia will cure the case.

The first menses: Too late or too early.

Character of blood: Irregular in every form, dark flow in the morning.

Quantity: Too scanty and sometimes too profuse and occasionally very feeble and scanty.

Duration: Shows varying degree of irregularities,

Concomitants: With menses there is bearing down sensation Pain comes from back to front,

especially in those ladies who are highly chilly having a weeping disposition; indifferent and apathetic with “tell-tale-face.”

Leucorrhoea : Yellowish, greenish with much itching, acrid leucorrhoea before menses, causes Soreness of pudenda.



Pregnancy : Morning sickness during pregnancy. The sight and thought of food makes the patient sick, even smell of cooking food nauseates (Ars., Colch.).

Prolapse : Prolapse of uterus. There is pressure and BEARING DOWN SENSATION AS IF EVERYTHING WOULD COME OUT FROM PELVIS The patient must cross the limbs tightly and “sitclose” to prevent it. Here it differs from Lilium tig. as follows:-

Sepia Lilium tigrinum

1. Bearing down pressure, from back to | 1. Bearing down, everything forcing down, as if abdomen. contents of the pelvis were being pushed down through a funnel, the out let being vagina.
2. Must cross legs to prevent protrusion of | 2. Must support vulva with hand or cross legs Parts.
3. Here the patient feel cold more. 3. Here the patient feels heat more.
4. Mentally the patient is very much | 4. Mentally the patient is always hurried and indifferent and apathetic. worried.
5. Complete absence of Sexual desire. 5. Sexual desire much more marked.

Skin :

Itching of skin at various parts, of external genitalia, not relieved by scratching and is apt to change to burning. Soreness of the skin and itching in bends of joints. There may also appear brown spots onthe skin. Ring worm, boils, blood boils, ulcers, etc. are regular occurrences. Lymphatic swellings andcrippled nails are often met with itching between fingers and in bends of joints. There is profuseperspiration while walking. There may also appear herpes circinatus in isolated spots, on upper part of body.

Respiratory Symptoms :

There is dry, hacking cough, especially in the evening.

Successive cough causes tickling sensation in the chest.

Oppression of the chest during morning and evening.

Shortness of breath when walking, especially when going upstairs. Congestion of blood to the chest, with violent palpitation of heart. DYSPNOEA IS BETTER BY DANCING. There is brown spot on thechest.

Chest symptoms are relieved by pressure of the hand on the thorax and by dancing.

Sepia is often indicated and useful in cases of phthisis particularly in women with characteristic Sepia symptoms.

Breath and sputum are very foetid, offensive, felt even by the patient (Psorinum).

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Morning and evening, washing, laundry work, dampness, left side, after sweat, cold air, before a thunderstorm.

Amelioration: By exercise, pressure, warmth of bed, hot application, drawing limbs up, cold bathing, after sleep. perenne

Relation :

Complementary to: Natrum mur., Phosphorus.

Inimical to: Laehesis, Pulsatilla.

Antidotes: Rhus tox., Antim. crud.

Sepia is antodoted by China, Mercurius, Phosphorus.



chapter :189 SILICEA


Pure Silica HAHNEMANN Silicic Oxide

INTRODUCTION

SILICEA is one of the twelve wonders of the Schuessler’s Tissue Remedies. It is a greatpolychrest and has got powerful hold on thehuman economy. Silicea is a long and deep-actingconstitutional remedy which was proved andincorporated in Homoeopathic Materia Medica byHahnemanh.

It occurs in abundance in nature and is chemically “inert” in its natural state, but once itis potentised, it works like a miracle.

Silicea has been proved to be a boon to the suffering humanity and serves the purpose of “SURGEON’S KNIFE” in the hands of aHomoeopath. It is capable of reaching and curing the derangement in the most vitalprocess of life; in the internal sphere of man, where “SURGEON’S KNIFE” can neverreach.

CLINICAL

Abdomen distended, Abdominal disorders, Abscess, Ankles weak, Boils, Bone affection, Cancer, Carbuncle, Constipation, Cough, Debility, Dentition, Diabetes,Enuresis, Epilepsy, Fistula, Foot-sweat suppressed. Foreign body expulsion of,Glandular swelling, Headache, Hernia, Perspiration offensive, Pleurisy, Rheumatism,Rickets, Somnambulism, Skin troubles, Suppuration, Sweat, Sexual organs’ ailments,Teeth—caries of, Tenesmus, Ulcers, Urethra—stricture of, Urinary trouble, Vaccinationafter effects, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Silicea acts on bones, cartilages, mucous membranes, skin, elastic and cellular tissues, nerves, glands, lachrymal duct, Eustachian tube, etc.

PATHOGENESIS

It is a pus-forming remedy, it promotes and controls suppuration and hastens formation of abscesses and boils (Merc. sol., Hepar sulph.). Hence it should not be givento the patient in whom there is a deposit of tubercular focus in the lungs even after thefilling of the tubercular focus in the lungs is complete, because it has got a tendency tore-establish an inflammation and throw it out, resulting in the formation of abscess ofthe lungs again.


CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: Pale face with lean and thin body. Sickly appearance with dry

skin. Weak and lax musculature.

Temperament: Irritable and sanguine temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: EXTREMELY CHILLY patient.

Miasm: Silicea covers all the three miasms. Still it is predominantly anti-psoric

rather than anti-sycotic and anti-syphilitic.

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1   Highly chilly patient. Wraps himself up with warm clothing even in hot summer weather (Psorinum, Hepar sulph.).

2. Bad effects of vaccination especially convulsion and suppuration (Thuja, Antim. tart., Mezerium, Crot. hor).

3. Every little injury suppurates (Merc, sol., Hepar, Graphites, Petroleum).

4. It has got a wonderful CONTROL OVER THE SUPPURATIVE PROCESS, anywhere and everywhere in the body.

5. Want of grit either moral or physical is well-marked.

6. Constitution which suffers from deficient nutrition from defective assimilation.

7. The patient is very sensitive to all impressions, especially noise and becomes anxious therefrom.

There may be vertigo on looking up; better by wrapping up warmly, and when lyingon left side. Headache starts at occiput, ascends to vertex and finally settles over the right eye(Sang.—Left eye, Spigelia); relief from profuse urination and wrapping up warmly.Obstinate constipation; stool hard and knotty. When PARTLY EXPELLEDRECEDES BACK (Thuja). Stool has to be removed mechanically (Calc. carb.,Thuja).Always there is constipation before, during and after menses (Diarrhoea before menses—Ammon. carb., Bovista, Ver.alb.). Night-walking. The patient gets up while asleep, walks about and lies down again- all quite unconsciously. Scrofulous rachitic children with large head and open fontanelles and sutures, much sweating about the head and distended abdomen.Desire for cold drinks, cold food, ice cream, Wants to be magnetised.
Sweat of hands, toes, feet, axillae is VERY OFFENSIVE. Intolerable, sour, carrion-like odour of feet, without perspiration and every evening.

Mind : The patient is very nervous and is of excitable temperament. There is lack of stamina and he is very much afraid of failure; so much so that a really efficient

public speaker begins to doubt about his performance; but once he starts to deliverhis lectures, he gains back his usual self-confidence and command and he does well. The patient is very sensitive to all impressions. There is WANT OF GRIT, bothmental and physical.

Fixed ideas : The patient has got pin mania, especially for babies. The patient thinks of nothing except pins; he fears them, still searches for them and counts andpreserves them with great care. Headstrong and obstinate babies who cry whenkindly spoken to. Such babies usually surfer from convulsion after vaccinatioin.

Ailments from : Vaccination, suppressed foot-sweet exposure to draught of air. Chest complaints of stone cutters.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Chronic sick headache since some severe diseases of youth.

Location: Headache arises from the nape of neck ascends the vertex and finally settles over the right eye; generally right sided headache.

Sensation: Sensation of roaring or shattering in brain.

Character of headache: Pressing and bursting headache as if eyes and brain were forced out. Violent headache with confusion of mind. Violent tearing in head with pressive pain in morning. Jerkingheadache extending to brain. Tearing in vertex as if it would burst. Headache with bruised pain above theeyes so that the patient can scarcely open them.

Modalities:

 Aggravation: By mental exertion, noise, motion, jerking, light, stooping, cold air, uncovering,
draught of air.

 Amelioration: By binding the head tightly, by profuse urination and covering the head warmly.

Concomitants: There is difficulty in holding up the head. Headache causes chilliness and nausea. Scalpisvery sensitive to touch. The patient is very chilly with low vitality. He is usualty-eonstipated.

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

Stomach. There is disgust for meat and WARM FOOD. Loss of appetite or ravenous hunger with great thirst, but vomiting occurs after drinking          (Arsenic, Ver.alb.).

Abdomen : There is painful cold feeling in the abdomen with much rumbling and colicky pain, better from application of external heat; obstinate           constipation.

Rectum : There is sensation of weakness or paresis whichresults in obstinate constipation so much so that faeces is retained for a long time in the rectum. Stool passes out with great straining (Alumina,Nux vom., Nux mos., Nat mur., Thuja). The peculiarity of the constipation and the stool is that it is partlyexpelled and then recedes back again (Thuja). Consequently the stool has to be removed mechanically(Calc. carb.). Fistula in ano alternates with chest complaints. (Berb. vul. Calc. phos).

Painful fissures and haemorrhoids which cause irritation and spasm of the sphincter-ani muscles. Constipation always occurs before, during and after menses.

Glandular affection : Inflammation and swelling of all the glands both extrnal and internal; all in a crop or singly especially in the region of the and heck with threatened suppuration. Inflammation, swellingand suppuration of glands—cervical, axillary, parotid, inguinal, sebaceous all may become malignant andgangrenous.

Sexual organs :

There is burning and soreness of genitals, with eruption on the inner parts of the thigh. Chronic gonorrhoea, with thick and foetid discharge. Leucorrhoea is milky and acrid causing itching of vulva andvagina which are very sensitive to touch. There may be discharge of blood from the vagina evrytime thechild nurses and also appear in labia. Silicea promotes expulsion of moles and also corrects threatenedabortion and stops haemorrhage after abortion.

Elephantiasis of the scrotum, with sexual erethysem and nocturnal emission can also be treated successfully with this great remedy. HYDROCELE especially of a child, is controlled by this drug.

Nipples are very sore; ulcerate easily, NIPPLES ARE DRAWN IN LIKE A FUNNEL (Sars., Hydrastis). There may afso be fistulous ulcers of breasts.

Skin =

Silicea is one of the top ranking remedies for PROMOTING AND CONTROLLING THE PROCESS OF INFLAMMATION AND SUPPURATION. It has got a tendency to promote and expel foreign bodiesfrom the tissues wherever they may be lodged. Old scar becomes painful again, indurated, shiny andglossy due to sluggish constitution, resulting from bad effects of vaccination.

Unhealthy skin :

Every injury suppurates (Hepar, Graphites, Petroleum). Crippled nails on fingers and toes. Felons,abscesses and old indurated tumours come within the domain of this remedy. Silicea has a wonderfulcontrol over, the suppurative process—soft tissues, periosteum or bones, maturing abscesses or whendesired for reducing excessive suppuration. Delicate, pale, waxy skin. Small wounds heal with difficultyand suppurate profusely. There are painful pustular eruptions, at last forming suppurating ulcers, onforehead, occiput, sternum and spine. Eczematous or herpetic eruptions, disposition tp boils in variousparts which are very painful to touch, fistula lachrymalis, in growing toe-nails; panaritium, blood boils,carbuncles, ulcers of all kinds. Fistulae are very painful and offensive with high spongy edges, proudfleshes in them. Fissures in anus, causing intolerable pain while passing stool.

Silicea Baby :

Silicea is adapted .and suited to growing children who suffer from malnutrition, not because the food is lacking in quantity or quality because the system does not assimilate the food materialsProperly. The baby is psoric and HIGHLY CHILLY, having scrofulous and tubercular diathesis, WITHLARGE HEAD OPEN FONTANELLES AND SUTURES; POT BELLIED ABDOMEN. Constiution whichsuffers from bad effects of vaccination.

The baby is very slow in learning to walk due to weak ankles resulting in retardation of walking because of deficiency and in “bone-forming” substances.

Sweat: The baby has very OFFENSIVE foot-sweat; furthermore, the sweat in axillae and hands is also offensive. There is sweating behind the neck and in the region of occiput. (Calc. carb.).

Skin: The baby suffers from various kinds of skin troubles caused by bad effects of vaccination. Every little inury suppurates; inflammation, swelling and abscess formation after vaccination.

Constipation: Stool is difficult to evacuate from the rectum due to its inactivity. The stool partly Comes out and then recedes back.


Mind: The baby is headstrong and obstinate who cries when kindly sopken to; has pin mania.

The child desires to be magnetised (Calcarea carb., Phosphorus).

Child has aversion on to mother’s milk.


Modalities: Wants much covering around the head but likes cold food and drinks.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In new moon and full moon, cold, during menses, from washing and uncovering.

Amelioration: By warmth, wrapping up the head and in summer.

Relations :

Complementary to: Thuja and Sanicula.

It is both complementary and chronic of Pulsatila, for Pulsatilla plant grows well in the land where silicea is abundant.

Incompatible: When used before or after mercurius.

Is followed well by: Hepar sulph and Fluoric acid.

chapter : 190 SPIGELIA

Pink Root HAHNEMANN Loganiaceae

INTRODUCTION

The Demerara pink root, a grass from which this drug has been prepared was used in the daysof Galen and Aristotle as a worm expellerantihelminth. The leaves of this shrub waspounded together with some sweetening agent andwas used in crude physiological doses to expelround worms particularly in children. HenceMaster Hahnemann unto whom we owe theintroduction of this medicine to the Homoeopathicsystem, named it Spigelia Anthelmic.

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris, Ciliary neuralgia, Cold, Constipation Depression of spirit, Eyes— pain in, Glaucoma, Headache, Heart affections, Neuralgia, Toothache, Worms, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Spigelia acts especially upon the fibrous and muscular tissues of eyes and heart. The nerves especially the fifth Cranial nerve—Trigeminal nerveis affected by this medicine.The head, particularly the left side is affected.

PATHOGENESIS

When affecting the eyes—left being more common, it produces congestion, redness and intolerable pain with dilated pupils; even the headache of left side centres on the lefteye. Heart produces violent contractions resulting in roaring heart. Trigeminal neuralgiais one of the main pathogenetic effects when it affects cranial nerves. The fibrous tissuesproduce a state of inflammation, rheumatic, arthritis, etc.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Spigelia is especially adapted to anaemic, debilitated subjects who are brokendown, pale with light hair and yellow skin. In children who are afflicted withascarides and luimbrici.

Temperament; Nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient. Even open air is unbearable.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Rheumatic diathesis,


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Left sided affections e.g. left side of head, left eye, etc.

2. Body painfully sensitive to touch, parts touched feel chilly (kali carb.).

3. Visible, audible, violent and roaring heart is very well-marked.

4. Aggravation: By touch and pressure (but pressure relieves neuralgia); motion.


Amelioration: By rest. Symptoms are ameliorated by lying on right side with head high (Arsenic, Cactus, Spongia).

. Pains are sharp, stitching and sticking.

. Afraid of sharp, pointed things, like pins, needles, etc.

. Pains increase and decrease with the rising and setting of the sun.ornaw

. It is a good worm remedy and expels worms.

PARTICULARS

Eyes :

Location: Usually left eye Is AFFECTED.

Sensation: Eyes feel too large for the orbit.

Character of pain: Violent pain about the eyes, pressive pain on turning them, pupils dilated with severe pain in and around the eyes. Eyeballs sensitive to touch, sharp, stabbing and sticking pain throughthe eyeballs.

Modalities: Worse from touch, motion, noise turning the eyes, from cold, damp and rainy weather.

Neuralgia : Of trigeminal nerve.

Location: Left side, e.g., left orbit, left eye, left malar bone, left sided teeth.

Character of pain : Shooting, burning and tearing type of neuralgic pain. Periodic type of prosopalgia with stabbing pain running into the back                     of the head.

Modalities: Aggravation: From morning till sun-set, motion, noise and COLD DAMP RAINY WEATHER.

Relieved: By pressure.

Toothache :

Causation: Toothache from tobacco smoking.

Character of pain: Sharp, stabbing, sticking pain, tearing toothache, very much sensitive to touch.

Modalities: Aggravation from cold air, water, when thinking of it and relieved BY EATING OR LYING DOWN.

Headache

Causation: Abuse of tobacco.

Location: Left sided headache, starts at the base of brain, spreading over the head and finally locating in in left eye, orbit and temple of left side.

Sensation: As if a band is around the head.

Character of pain : Violent pain in left parietal bone. Violent throbbing and pulsating type of pain. There is sharp, stabbing and sticking pain through the eyeball back into the head. The head is muchsensitive to touch.

Modalities :

 Aggravation : Headache starts at sunrise reaches its height at noon, declines by the sunset; aggravates from motion, noise and touch.

 Amelioration: by lying on right side with head high.

Heart

Rheumatic affections of the heart. Painful complaints associated with valvular troubles, especially growing out of rheumatic pericarditis and endocarditis of rheumatic character.

Irregularity of heart beat with violent palpitation. Visible, audible, violent and roaring heart with systolic blowing at apex. There, is stitching needle-like pain in chest, synchronous with pulse. Pulse is weak and irregular.There, is great dyspnoea with pain in chest, must lie on right side with head high.Precordia region is very much sensitive to touch.There is thrusting pain in the chest like knife.

Modalities:

 Aggravation: From motion, touch and from colt weather.

 Amelioration: By lying on right side with head high.

General Modalities

Aggravation: From motion, noise, touch, turning the eyes and from every shaking.

Amelioration: Lying on right side with head high and in spring.


Relations

Antidotes: Merc.

Antidoted by: camp., Puls.


chapter :191 SPONGIA TOSTA

Roasted Sponge HAHNEMANN Coelentirata

INTRODUCTION

This remedy was introduced into our Materia Medica by Samual Hahnemann. Accordingto Hahnemann toasted sponge was firstmentioned as a specific, remedy for goitre byArnald Von Villanova. It contains Iodine andcertain other ingredients of minor importance.

CLINICAL

Angina Pectoris. Asthma. Cough. Croup. Goitre- Exophthalmic. Heart-affections. Laryngitis. Rheumatic fever. Testicles-inflammation of. Tuberculosis. Whooping cough.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

Its chief action is on the respiratory tract, larynx & trachea. It also acts on heart & glands, especially, thyroid & testes.


CONSTITUTION

Physical make up : It is especially adapted to diseases of children and women & persons having light hair, lax fibre, fair complexion. Heat & Cold relation : Chilly patient.

Miasm : Psoric, Syphilitic & Sycotic. All the three miasms are in the background.

Diathesis : Tubercular diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Swelling & induration of glands.

2) Awakens in a fright and feels as if suffocating; as if he had to breathe through a sponge.

3) Great dryness of mucous membranes of air passages—throat, larynx, trachea, bronchi — “dry as a horn.”

4) Goitre : Thyroid glands swollen even with chin; with suffqcative paroxysms at night.

5) Cough : Dry, barking, croupy; sibilant like a saw driven through a pine board < from sweets, cold drinks, lying with head low > from eating &    drinking warmthings’.

6) Every mental excitement increases the cough.

7) Croup : anxious, wheezing, < during inspiration & before midnight.

8) Sore throat aggravates after eating sweet things.

9) Angina Pectoris : Contracting pain, heat, faintness, suffo-cation, anxiety & sweat, < after midnight.

10) Worse after sleep or sleeps into aggravation (Lach.)

11) Ailments : from cold weather, Tobacco, Suppressed gonorrhoea, Mental excitement, Sweets.

PARTICULARS

Respiratory Symptoms:

Spongia is one of the routine remedies for croupy cough in our practice. There is great dryness of mucous membranes of air passages such as throat, larynx, trachea, bronchi, etc.

Throat:

There is dryness of mucous membranes of throat and stitching pain, There is also burning, stinging and tickling which causes cough. Patient clears throat constantly.

Sore throat : Aggravation after eating sweets.

Cough :

Causation— Exposure : Exposure to dry cold wind, cold drinks, tobacco smoking, sweets.

Character of cough : Cough is dry, barking.gasping, ringing, wheezing, whistling. As there is great dryness of all air passages, cough is dry, sibilant like a saw driven through a pine board and usually withno mucous rales. Sometimes there may be asthmatic cough with wheezing, suffocation and profuseexpectoration.

Modalities :

Aggravation : Dry cold wind, cold drinks, sweets, smoking, lying with head low, mental
excitement.
Amelioration : Eating or drinking warm things

Croup :
Croup is anxious, wheezing and worse during inspiration and before midnight. (Aggravation during expiration—Aeon; Agg. before morning, Hep. Sulph)

Asthma :

Asthma from taking cold, after menses, in consequence of goitre with organic disease of heart.  Patient cannot lie down and fears she will die of suffocation, After every slight motion looses her breath  becomes faint.

Modalities :Agg : At full moon, after sleep. Amelio ; Bending forward.




Glandular Symptoms

Spongia causes enlargement and hardness of the gland?. It has got special action on Thyroid gland & testes.

Thyroid

It is an infallible remedy in cases of goitre with swelling and induration of thyroid gland. Thyroid gland is swollen even with chin; with suffocative paroxysms at night. The patient may awaken in a fright andfeels as if suffocating; as if he had to breathe through a sponge.

Testes : It is one of the best remedies for. chronic orchitis esp. after maltreatment and suppressed gonorrhoea. Tests are swollen with bruised, squeezed & swollen, painful spermatic cord.

Heart symptoms :

It is a great remedy in angina pactoris and organic diseases of heart, such as Valvular insufficiency and hypertrophy of heart where the symptoms are as follows : in angina pec-toris there is contractig pain,heat, faintnes, suffocation, anxiety & sweat; worse after midnight. The patient wakes up suddenly aftermidnight with pain, suffocation and great anxiety.

Cardiac symptoms are usually attended with gasping respiration and asthmatic symptoms. Violent palpitation with pain before or during menses.

General modalities :

Aggravation : At night, after sleep, cold air, cold food and drinks, lying with head low. Amelioration Warm food and drink.

Relations :

Follows well after Acon. Hep. Sulph. in Croup Followed well by: Bromium, Carbo veg., Hep. Sulph. Antidoted by : Camphor.



chapter :192 STANNUM METALLICUM

Tin HAHNEMANN The Element

INTRODUCTION

This remedy was first introduced into the Materia Medica by MASTER HAHNEMANN. Itwas used in the ancient times for variousailments till the time Homoeopathy came intothe field. The only use made of it by theAllopaths was as a vermifuge (worm expeller).The keen intellect of Hahnemann is responsiblefor the wonderful unfoldin’g of the strangeproperties of this neglected mineral tin...one ofthe oldest minerals known, is a component ofbronze. In Homoeopathy the crude mineral wellpulverized, is used after potentization.

CLINICAL

Abdominal disorders, Anaemia, Asthma, Chest affection. Colic, Cough, Consumption, Convulsion, Debility, Epilepsy, Gastralgia, Headache, Hysteria, Leucorrhoea, Menstrualdisorders, Neuralgia, Paralysis, Phthisis, Throat and Lung affection, Uterus—prolapseof, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The chief action of Stannum met. is centred upon the nervous system, respiratory organs and female genital organs.

PATHOGENESIS

It produces catarrhal inflammation of mucous membrane, profuse muco-purulent expectoration with cough, bronchitis, etc. On the cerebro-spinal system it leads toprofound prostration, paralysis, convulsion and neuralgic pains.

CONSTITUTION

It is especially suited to persons who have long been growing feeble. There is increasing weakness, cachexia with sallow waxy countenance and dark rings under theeyes.

Relation with heat and cold: There is no clear cut indication about the fact whether the patient is chilly or hot.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

Diathesis: Tubercular diathesis.


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

Pain begins lightly and increases gradually to the highest point and then gradually declines-inihe same manner as it appeared (platina, Syphilinum).

There is GREAT DEBILITY and profound weakness which is the keynote of

Stannum. It is marked both mentally and bodily. The chest is so weak as to make talking difficult, if not impossible. The patient is so weak that she drops into a chairinstead of sitting down.

. Feels weak and faints especially when going downstairs (Borax, Chamomilla). Can go up well enough (rev. Calc. carb., lodum)

. Nausea and vomiting from the odour of cooking food (Arsenic, Colchicum, Sepia).

. Empty, sinking all-gone sensation in chest and stomach is yet another grand

feature of Stannum.

. Sweetish and salty expectoration and taste in mouth.

. The patient experiences very debilitating sweat after 4 a.m.

. The patient is sad, despondent, feels like crying all the time, but crying makes her worse.

. “Yellowishness” of Stannum secretions is worth noting, e.g. in leucorrhoea, sputa,etc.

Mind : Mentally the patient is very much sad and despondent. She manifests great sadness, a strong disinclination to talk and pronounced aversion to the company ofmen. She is anxious, weak and irritable.Disposition to weep. She fells like crying all the time; can cryat any time, but crying
makes her worse.There is continued restlessness with anxiety.Her distress of mind ceases aS soon as menses begin to flow. These mental symptoms are caused by emotion, fright, etc.

Ailments, from : Emotion, fright, masturbation, dentition, worm and over using voice.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache is caused by fright; emotion, sexual excess, etc.

Location: Headache over one or the other eye; mostly of the leftside.

Sensation: Feels as if the head would burst from inward blows, as if constricted by a hand.

Character of pain: Aching pain in temples and forehead. Violent blowing, beating pain begins lightly and increases gradually to the highest point and then gradually declines.

Modality:

 Aggravation from motion, from 10 a.m. to 3 or 5 p.m.

 Amelioration by hard pressure.


Abdomen :

There is colic in abdomen.

Location: Around the navel.

Sensation: Empty feeling in the abdomen and chest.


Character of pain: Cramp like-pain; begins lightly and increases, gradually to the highest point and
then gradually declines.There is nausea and vomiting from the odour of cooking food.

Modalities:

 Aggravation: From drinking anything warm.

 Amelioration: By hard pressure and by lying on abdomen, across the kness.

Respiratory Symptoms :

Cough :

Location: Left side of the chest is predominantly affected.

Sensation: Empty all-gone senation in the chest. There is profound weakness in the chest accompanied by soreness in the chest.

Character of pain: Stitching pain in the left side with oppressive and short respiration.

There is rawness and soreness in larynx, and trachea with smarting sensation all the way down when coughing. The pain may begin lightly and increases gradually to the highest point andthen subsides and disappears gradually in the same manner as it appeared.

Character of cough: Deep, hollow, shattering, strangling concussive cough in paroxysms ofthree (Cup. met.). Cough in fatiguing paroxysms with a hoarse weak sound.

Character of sputa: There is accumulation of great quantity of mucus in trachea, easily thrown off by coughing. Expectoration of profuse white mucus like white of an egg. Yellow, green pus, withsweetish, salty taste in the mouth during the day.

There is inexpressible weakness in the chest. She is so weakihat she is unable to talk.

Modalities:

* Aggravation: From talking, singing, laughing, lying on right side, drinking anything warm.

* Amelioration: From expectoration and hard pressure.

Hoarseness :

Causation: Due to paralytic weakness.

Sensation: Weakness is also manifested in the voice.

Character: Hoarseness with loss of voice; vocal cord wilhnot respond; talking makes him feel weak.There is deep, hollow and husky voice.

Modalities: Worse from using the voice and better by coughing. Expectoration relieves hoarseness.

Pulmonary tuberculosis :

Stannum, useful in warding off phthisis, is also a wonderful palliative in that disease. There is history of increasing weakness, cachexia, catarrhal condition and debiltating sweat with hectic fever. The body isweak, sallow countenance and pale face.

Sensation: There is all gone empty feeling in chest. So weak that the patient is unable to talk.

Character of cough: There is dyspnoea with opprression of breathing. Violent, rocking cough. Gagging. Retching is the rnost intense suffering.

Character of sputa: There is copious, thick, yellow, bloody sputa; expectoration tastes sweetish. Chest is filled with mucus. He coughs and expectorates and yet some smtfiTremains.

Sweat :

There is exhausting night sweat with hectic temperature. Perspiration principally on forehead and on nape of neck. Debilitating sweat, smelling musty and offensive; every morning at 4 a.m.

Female genital organs :

Stannum met. is an excellent remedy for menstrual troubles, indicated when the following symptoms are present:

Menses :

Time: Too early.

Quantity: Too profuse.

Before menses: Sadness prevails (Nitric acid, Ammon. Carb).

During menses: There is pain in malar bones, with bearing down sensation.

Character of pain: During menses, there is pain in the vagina, shooting upwards-with great weakness. While dressing in the morning patient has to sit down several times to rest.

Leucorrhoea :

Leucorrhoea is of transparent, yellowish mucu with considerable prostration of strength, great debility weakness which seems to proceed from the chest.

Prolapse of uterus :

There is bearing down sensation in t! uterine region. Prolapse of uterus and vagina. The patient is so weak that she drops into a chair instead of sitting down.

Sensation of prolapse is aggravated during stool.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: By laughing, singing, talking, using the voice, tying 01 right side and drinking anything
warm.

Amelioration: Coughing or expectorating relieves hoarseness, hard pressure.

Relations :

Complimenrary to: Pulsatilla.


chapter: 193 STAPHISAGRIA



INTRODUCTION

In the good old ancient days, long before Hahnemann, the application of this nut, was inexistence evidently in domestic practice for thecure of toothache. The nut was known to anagent for producing vomiting and salivation andused for the cure toothache. Teste foundStaphisagria a remedy for sea-sickness. To besuccessful, Staphisagria must be taken at themoment when dizziness and nausea commence,before vomiting sets in and it will giveinstantaneous relief. It is the best remedy forremoving the habit of masturbation in young subjects and also for removing abnormal appetite in adults.

CLINICAL

Anger fits of, Backache, Cauliflower excrescences, Chalazion, Condylomata, Cough, Eczema, Eyes-tumours on Masturbation—effects of, Neuralgia, Prostate—affections of,Rheumatism, Sciatica, Sexual organs affection, Skin affection, Selfabuse,Spermatorrhoea, Styes, Teeth affection, Urinary affection, Warts etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main seats of action of Staphisagria are genitourinary organs, brain, mindrgastro-intestianal tract, respiratory organs and skin.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes irritation and inflammation on the genitourinary organs, especially prostatic portion of the urethra and ejaculatory and seminal ducts, producing sexualdesire and excitement, leading to abuse of sex, retention of urine, etc. It also causes-various skin troubles such as styes, chalazae, eczema, warts, etc.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up of the body: The patient, usually a young man, is very much weak and debilitated, with guilty and abashed look, who craves tobacco, and is having wart andunhealthy skin.

Temperament: Nervous and melancholic temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora and sycosis are in the background.


GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1.For the mental effects of onanism, sexual abuse or sexual excess.

2. Anger with indignation is one of the important causes for many of the ailments,

. For bad effects of injuries from sharp cutting instruments and post-surgical

Great nervous weakness; weakness of memory from sexual excess. operations.

. Sleepy all day, awake all night, with bodyache all over (Psor., Lac. can.—rev. of Lyco).

6. Styes and chalazae on eyelids, leaving hard nodosities in their place.

7. Toothache during menses. Teeth are very painful to touch of food or drink, but not from biting or chewing; aggravated by drawing in cold air    into mouth (rev. of Mez.).

8. There is intense CRAVING FOR TOBACCO.

There is intolerable urging to urinate; still the patient has to wait for a long time to

pass urine; with subsequent burning in urethra.

Persistently dwelling on sexual subjects. Constantly thinking of the sexual pleasure.

Cough only in daytime (Euphrasia, Fer. met.) and is excited by cleaning the teeth and by tobacco smoke.

Extreme appetite even when the stomach is full of food. Ravenous hunger a day before the attack of fever.

Eczema with acrid oozing; new vesicles from contact of the exudations.

Mind : Staphisagria manifets various peculiar mental symptoms which are as follows:-

Mental affections are caused by onanism, sexual excess, sexual abuse, pride, envy or chagrin and anger with indignation.

The patient is very sensitive to slightest me’ntal impression and least action. Even harmless word offends (Ign.).

Great indignation about things done by others or by himself; but grieves about consequences,

The patient is very apathetic and indifferent; low-spirited and has weak memory from sexual abuse (Anac., Aur., Nat., Phos acid).

Ill humoured children cry for things which, after receiving, they petulantly push and throw away (Bry., Cham.,, cina,, Kreosote).

The patient was insulted, but being too dignified to fight, subdued his wrath and went home sick, trembling and exhausted; very much abashed and apprehensive.Sensation of a round ball in the forehead sitting firmly there, even after shaking the

head (Sensation of ball in the head and inner parts, Sepia in the urinary bladder,Lachesis).



OR The patient persistently dwells upon sexual subjects and constantly think of sexual pleasure.

15. Ailments from : Onanism, sexual excess, sexual abuse, loss of vital fluids, pride, envy, chagrin, anger with indignation, mortification, unmerited insults,vexation, reserved displeasure, mechanical injuries from sharp cutting instruments,post-surgical operations, lithotomy or ovariotomy.

PARTICULARS

Marasmus :
Eyes :

Styes and chalazae appear on upper lids or on both the eyelids; coming on one after another and when they disappear, hard nodosities are left in their place (Conium, Thuja).

Gastro-intestinal Symptoms :

Toothache : There is toothache appearing during menses. Both sound and decayed toothache. But the peculiarity of the toothache is that the teeth are very painful to the touch of food and drink, butnot from biting or chewing. Toothache is aggravated by drawing in cold air into the mouth and fromcold drinks and after eating (rev. of mez.). The teeth turn black, show dark streaks through them; cannotkeep them clean, tooth crumbles and decays at edges (Decays at root and crown intact, Thuja, Mez.—Crown decay and roots intact, Merc. sol.). Scorbutic cachexia.

Stomach : Sensation as if the stomach and abdomen feel hanging down and relaxed (Agar., Ipec.). There is extreme appetite even when the stomach is full of food (Cina, Lyco., Lac can.): Ravenous hungerfor days before attack of fever. There is also colicky pain in abdomen after lithotomy or ovariotomy.Nausea, vomiting during pregnancy.

Urine symptoms : There is nervous weakness as if done up after much hard work. The patient has urgent urging to urinate; still has to sit at the urinal for hours before urine will pass. This symptom isespecially noticed in newly married women after coition or after difficult labour. There is, burning inurethra when not urinating. Prolapse of urinary bladder (cystocele) is a common feature. Where thereare prostatic troubles in old men even after urinating, there is urging followed by pain.

Sexual organs : Due to sexual excess or sexual abuse, the patient feels very much guilty, with sunken face and abashed look; very much weak and prostrated. Sexual organs are relaxed andatrophied, with nocturnal emission followed by weakness and prostration. Sexual organs are very painfuland sensitive. Vulva is so sensitive that the patient can hardly wear a napkin (platina). There is intolerablesexual desire and excitement and, therefore, the patient is persistently dwelling upon sexual subjects andconstantly thinking of sexual pleasure.

Spermatorrhoea caused by sexual excess and/or sexual abuse is successfully treated by this drug.

Cough : Patient requiring Staphisagria suffers from croupy cough, which is generally present only in the daytime (Euph., Per. met.) or after dinner. Cough is worse after meat, after vexation orindignation and is exeited by cleaning of teeth and by tobacco smoking.

Skin :

Staphisagria patient manifests various kinds of skin troubles. There is eczema all over the body, from which a yellowish, acrid moisture oozes out, forming crusts over it. Wherever the exudation comes into contact with skin new vesicles formed. There is intolerable itching. The itch disappears by scratching and the itch appears; at another place, i.e. scratching changes location of itching.

There may be also fig-warts which are dry, pedunculated or, cauliflower-like; appear usually after abuse of mercury.

Staphisagria is ideally suited to mechanical injuries from sharp cutting instruments or post-surgicaloperations, with stinging and smarting pain like the cutting of a knife.

Arthritic nodosities appear in joints, especially of fingers, inflammation of phalanges with sweatingand suppuration; backache which is aggravated at night in bed and in the morning before rising, etc. arealso successfully dealt with by this drug.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: By mental affections, from anger, indignation, grief, mortification, loss of vital fluids, tobacco, onanism, sexual excess and from least touch on affected parts.
Relations :

Compare: Causticum, Colocynth, Ign., Lyco., Puls., Staphisagria acts well after each of them.

Causticum, Colocynth and Staph., follow well in the order named.

Inimical: Ranunculus bulbosus, either before or after.

Note : An application of the dilution of one part of Staphisagria tincture with four parts of water will kill the lice or the head vermin. It should also be taken internally in potentised form.

chapter:194  STICTA PULMONARIA

Lungwort

INTRODUCTION

It is a little known and a rarely used remedy,put that does not render it any the less importantfor those cases that will call for sticta, will needsticta, none but sticta will help.

CLINICAL

Anosmia. Atrophic Rhinitis. Catarrh. Cough. Headache. Housemaid’s Knee. Rheumatism.

SPHERES OF ACTION AND PATHOGENESIS

It Chiefly acts on respiratory tract & joints; but also having action on head, gastrointestinal& genitourinary tracts.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Respiratory Symptoms :

Nose : Feeling of fullness at the root of the nose is the charac-teristic symptom of Sticta. There is dryness of nasal mucous membrane not due to lack ofsecretion, but secretions dry up very rapidly leaving thick crusts behind them. Thepatient blows his nose, but no dishcarge comes out, There may be incessantsneezing, hay fever etc.

Cough :The Cough of Sticta is also mostly dry, but loose in the morning. It is animportant drug in cases of cough left after measles. Throat is raw with posteriordropping of mucus and dry hacking cough. (Sang, Eup. Perf, Puls.)

Modalities : Aggravation—Inspiration, towards evening and when tired. Concomitant—Rheumatism precedes catarrhal symptoms

2) Headache : Sticta is suited to catarrhaj headache before discharge appears. There is dull headache with heavy pressure in forehead and root of the nose.Sensation as if scalp was too small may be there,

8) Rheumatism Causation : Fall.

Location : Specially right shoulder, Knee Joints and neck are affected. (Cheli, Mag. Garb. Sang., Strontia),
Sensation : There is drawing & shooting pains in joints. Joints are red, painful & swollen. The presence of spot of inflammation & redness over affected joints are very characteristics of sticta. In rheumatic stiffness of neck and rheumatic pain in rightshoulder joint, deltoid and biceps sticta is a very useful remedy, House maid’sknee.

4) Ailments .from—Fall, Haemorrhages.

5) Mind— Confusion of ideas with great desire to talk as the patient cannot keep his tongue quiet. His lower limbs feel so light and airy that       they seem to hover inair.

6) General Modalities :

Aggravation : Sudden changes of temperature.

chapter : 195 STRAMONIUM


Thorn Apple HAHNEMANN Solanaceae

INTRODUCTION

Stramonium, the last of the great TRIO OFDELIRIUM, is a wonderful remedy obtainedfrom the vegetable kingdom. Thorn apple is verypoisonous, affecting primarily the brain andsecondarily other organs. Hahnemann’s high intelligence penetrated into this aspect of theproblem and transformed this very destructivepoisonous property into a useful unique remedyapplied successfully for the characteristic mentalderangement. It has been found to be very usefulfor the human race for all time to come.

CLINICAL

Apoplexy, Chorea, Delirium tremens, Ecstasy, Epilepsy, Eye affection, Headache,Hysteria, Mania, Meningitis, Stammering, Trismus, Vomiting, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

The main seats of action of Stramomium, are nervous system, brain, mind, skin and mucous membrane.

PATHOGENESIS

The action of this agent is very similar to that of Belladonna, except that the sympathetic nervous system is more affected by this drug than by Belladonna. It is apowerful narcotic and antispasmodic. The heart’s action is rendered more irregular thanby Belladonna and the involuntary muscular fibres or the bronchial tubes are relaxed toa great extent. It produces suppressed secretions and excretions of mucous membrane.

CONSTITUTION

Just like Belladonna, Stramonium too is more or less a drug required mostly in acute cases and as such the consideration of constitution of the patient is of little importance.However, it is more adapted to young plethoric persons and especially children in chorea,mania and fever with delirium.

Temperament: Bilious temperament,

Relations with heat and cold: Easily affected by cold in general.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.



GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. “Painlessness” is a very characteristic and striking feature of Stramonium. There is no pain with most of the complaints (Opium).

2. The patient DESIRES LIGHT AND COMPANY. Cannot bear to be alone for a moment. Always wants light, but dazzling light (e.g. light reflected from a mirror orflowing water) aggravates the troubles.

3. Great LOQUACITY is yet another important guiding symptom (Lach., Podo.). The patient is disposed to talk continuously; incessant and incoherent talking andlaughing, PRAYING,, BESEECHING, ENTREATING, etc.

4. The patient always feels sleepy, but cannot sleep (Bell., Cham. Op.).

5. During delirium and convulsion, there is twitching of single muscle or group of muscles, especially of upper part of the body (Aconite,    Agaricus, Cicuta).

6. Convulsion with consciousness (Nux vom.) is very characteristic of this remedy;renewed by sight of bright light.

7. Vomiting as soon as he raises head from the pillow, or from bright light.

8. The patient feels that his head is scattered about in many pieces.

9. He awakes with a shrinking look as if afraid of the first object seen.

10. Sight of water or anything gjittering or reflected light brings on spasm and convulsion. It is simply intolerable.

11. Mind : Stramonium, the last of the trio, is pre-eminently a high grade ‘delirium remedy. The mental symptoms very commonly found in this important remedy,which would help selection on the basis of similinum, are as follows:—

Loquacity is of the topmost degree in Stramonium. During delirium, the patient talks all the time, sings, makes verses, and raves; nonstop and incoherent talkingand laughing.

In this respect it is very similar to Belladonna and Hyoscydmus, but only differing in degree. Stramonium is very furious. Mania more acute and Congestion is morethan in Hyoscyamus but less than that of Belladonna. However, thereis noinflammation in Stramonium, as is usually found in Belladonna.

The patient has a disposition continuously for PRAYING, BESEECHING AND ENTREATING, especially with suppression of menses in ladies.

THE PATIENT ALWAYS WANTS AND DESIRES LIGHT AND COMPANY. Yet cannot tolerate shining bright object or reflected or dazzling light such as from amirror or flowing water. He cannot bear solitude and darkness; cannot remain in adark room alone.

From the sleep he awakes with a shrinking look as if he is very much afraid of the object first seen. He is too much terrified by hallucinations.

During delirium, the patient gets up and wants to escape and, therefore, he runsaway, and hides himself in a corner, difficult to be located.




Furthermore, he has peculiar imagination that he is many persons; he is lying crosswise; his head is in many pieces and isjying scattered about, etc.

There is strange delusions about his own identity. Thinks that he is very tall, double or a part is missing, etc.

The patient feels that he is seeing ghosts and dangerous animals, hears strange voices and he is in communion with spirits and talks in an unnatural language.When the child is reprimanded its pupils become dilated. Hydrophobia.

12. Ailments fom : Shock, fright, sun, child-birth, suppression of secretions and _ excretion (e.g. menses, urine, etc.).

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache is caused by shock, Sun’s heat or fright.

Location: There is intolerable pain in forehead and over the eyebrows.

Sensation: There is boring pain in forehead and tempjes. Head feels as if scattered about in many pieces.

Modalities: Aggravation: After sleep, in darkness or looking at bright object.

Relieved: By warmth.

Concomitants: Preceded by obscure vision. Rush of blood to head. Raises the head frequently from the pillow. Vertigo with tendency to-fall forward and to left.


Eyes :

Eyes are wide open, prominent and brilliant; pupils are widely dilated; insensible; contortion of eyes and eyelids. Pupils dilate when child is reprimanded. Loss of vision, complains that it is dark andcalls for light. Small objects look large. All objects look black.

Face:

Face is red and hot with cold hands and feet. There is circumscribed redness on the cheeks. (Sang.).Blood rushes to face with an expression of terror. Pale face, sometimes facial expression shows as ifsmiling (Risus sardonicus). Mouth is dry, with viscid saliva; yet aversion to water. Stammering tendency.The patient has to exert himself a long time before he can utter a word. Cannot swallow on account ofspasm of glottis; chewing motion of the mouth.The patient vomits persistently mucus and green bile as soon as he raises head from the pillow

Convulsion :

There is convulsion with consciousness (Nux vom.) which is very striking in this drug. Graceful thythmic motion, convulsion especially of upper extremities and upper part of the body. There istwitching and jerking of single muscle or a group of muscles (Acon., Agaricus, Cicuta, Zincummet.).Chorea with violent pain in left hip. Trembling and twitching of tendons.

The convulsive attack is aggravated by dazzling and shining lights and objects.

The patient has fear of water with excessive aversion to liquids. Spasmodic contraction of throat. Hydrophobia.


Fever :

Although Stramonium is not a fever remedy, it can be thought of in remittent, intermittent and continuous fever, provided the fever is acompanied and associated with furious delirium. During fever, there is coldness of the whole body with redness of face and suppressed urine. In chill stage, there is great sensitiveness to being uncovered. Wants to cover up completely. Chill is withoutthirsts and is followed by heat. The patient sleeps during heat stage and there is violent thirst after wakingup. Heat with anxiety or with thirst and vomiting. There is also profuse sweat which does not afford anyrelief.

Pain is very irregular, generally full, hard and quick, or small and rapid.

During all the stages of fever the patient has VIOLENT AND FURIOUS DELIRIUM which is very characteristic and peculiar in this drug.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: In darkness, when alone, looking at bright or shining objects, after sleep, when attempting to swallow and in forenoon.

Amelioration: From bright light, from company and from warmth.

Relations :

Follows well: After Belladonna, Cuprum, Hyos.

In metrorthagia from retained placenta. Secale cor., often follows when Stramonium fails.

Antidotes: Bellad6nna, Nux vomica, Hyoscyamus, lemon juice and vinegar.

It antidotes: Merc. sol., Plumbum.


chapter: 196 SULPHUR

i et enFlowers of Sulphur HAHNEMANN “S” An ElementBrimstone



INTRODUCTION

Sulphur is one ot the greatest ‘OLYCHRESTS’. IT IS THE KING OFANTIPSORIC HAVING a wide range inHomoeopathic prescribing. Hahnemann says
that Sulphur has reputation as a remedy againstitch perhaps as old as medicine i.e., as early as2000 years ago. Sulphur is a non-metallic yellow,brittle substance. It is found in plenty in Sicilyand Italy. In the organic world, we meet withSulphur everywhere. This element forms anessential component of the albuminoids, a classof compounds contained in all vegetable and animal structures. Sulphur is prepared forHomoeopathic use in two different ways, firstly the flowers of sulphur washed andcleaned, are mixed with alcohol to form the tincture; secondly by triturating flowers ofsulphur with sugar of milk.

CLINICAL

Acne, Anaemia, Asthma, Biliousness, Boils, Brain complaints, Catarrh, Cough,Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Eye affection, Eczema, Emaciation, Enuresis, Epilepsy, Eructation.Eruptions, Feet burning, Perspiring, Fever, Gout, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Liveraffection, Menstrual disorders, Neuralgia, Pleurisy, Pregnancy disorders, Rheumatism,Skin affection,. Throat and Lung affection, Vertigo, Worms, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Its action is centrifugal, from within outwards. It has great affinity for the skin. No remedy has more general, positive and persistent action upon the skin than Sulphur. Itacts pre eminently on the nervous system, also affecting the venous capillary system andthrough it affecting profoundly, the entire vegetative sphere. Mucous membranes alsofeel most severely the influence of Sulphur, especially of eyes, bronchi, urethra andrectum. The portal system also comes under its special influence.

PATHOGENESIS

Subjected to venous plethora, It has portal stasis manifesting as redness at the muco- cutaneous junctions e.g. nostrils, lips, anus, etc. Affecting the skin, it produces heat andburning with severe itching.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Sulphur is especially suited to lean, stoop-shouldered persons who walk and sit stooping, walk stooping like an old man. STANDING IS THE WORSTPOSITION FOR A SULPHUR PATIENT. They cannot remain standing; every standingposition is very uncomfortable and unbearable.

Dirty, filthy look of the body, prone to skin affections. This type of people have redness of all the external orifices e.g. nostrils, lips, anus, etc.

Temperament: Nervous temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Sulphur patient is very much sensitive to atmospheric changes. Yet he is accepted as a HOT PATIENT.

Miasm: It is the king of anti-psoric remedies.

Diathesis: Scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Complaints that are continually relapsing. Patient seems to get almost well, when the disease returns again and again.

2. When carefully selected remedies fail to produce a favourable effect, especially inacute diseases, it frequently serves to rouse the reactive     powers of the system andclears up the case.

3. Standing is the most uncomfortable position for a sulphur patient, they cannot remain standing. Every standing position is uncomfortable and      intolerable.

4. Though a hot patient, yet persistently refuses to take bath.

5. Burning anywhere. and everywhere on the body, general or local, is a great symptom of Sulphur. It is correct to say that “BURNING IS FOR SULPHUR andSULPHUR IS FOR BURNING”. Burning in the soles, palms vertex, eyes, nose,mouth, stomach, all over the skin, in the parts on which he lies. The burning isaggravated from the heat of bed and covering.Nash’s trio of burners are Sulphur, Arsenic and Phosphorus amongst whichSulphur is the leader.The burning of Arsenic is violent and acute and is RELIEVED BY HEAT, exceptinghead, with marked prostration and restlessness. Burning especially in acutediseases (rev. of Sulphur) with mid-day and mid-night aggravation and has fear of death.The burning of Phosphorus is found in every organ, e.g. in internal organs, in spots,along spine, in the palms, and soles; but generally in diseases of nervous system,which is worst in the evening.

6. A weak empty all-gone sensation in the stomach (Sepia, Chelidonium, Pulsatilla, Anacardium), especially about 11 a.m. (12 noon, Zincum met.).    Cannotwait for lunch.


7. Congestion in single parts; eyes, nose, lips, anus, etc. g. Sulphur should be thought of in the first instance when the patient comes with a history of suppression of skin diseases by external apptication e.g., lotions,ointments, etc.

9. There is intense craving for sweet, acid, alcohol, beer, whisky, aversion to milk, meat and business.

10. All the discharges, e.g. leucorrhoea, nasal discharge, etc. are ACRID AND OFFENSIVE.

11. Aggravation by heat is another keynote of Sulphur, especially by warmth of bed.

12. Sulphur facilitates absorption of serous or inflammatory exudates in pleura, joints, when the best selected remedies like—Apis, Bryonia, etc. fail.

13. Mind : Ragged philosopher. Even rags seem beautiful when the patient takes a fancy for it. Everything seems full of beauty. He dresses himself in the most filthyrags but considers tfiem to be the most elegant of decorations. The patient wears a paper crown, thinking he is His Majesty, the king. There is great weakness of memory. Cannot find the proper word during conversation. He is very selfish and has no regard for others. Sulphur is indifferentand disinclined to work of any and every description. Nothing appeals to him. Work,pleasure, talking, exercise, etc. afford him no enjoyment.There is a feeling of movement in abdomen, as of a child (Crocus, Thuja). Happy dreams wake him up singing at night. He is of a nervous temperament and hypochondriacal in nature.

14, Ailments from : Alcohol, suppression of skin diseases, Sun’s heat, over exertion, etc.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal system :

Abdomen : There is WEAK, EMPTY, ALL GONE OR FAINT FEELING IN THE ABDOMEN AT ABOUT 11 A.M. Cannot wait for lunch. Frequent, weak, faint spells during the day with buming sensation.

There is great desire for sweets.


Aggravation from milk and meat.

Movement in the abdomen as of a foetus, is felt by the patient.

Constipation :

© Causation: Alcoholism and suppression of skin eruption.

© Character of stool: Stool is very much HARD, KNOTTY, DRY AS IF BURNT, LARGE AND PAINFUL. Difficult and painful defaecation. The patient is afraid to pass stool on account of pain, or paincompels the patient to give up the effort, and the discharge of faeces is painful to parts over which it passes.

© Constipation alternates with diarrhoea.


Piles : Piles are very painful. It may be blind or bleeding. The blood is venous with itching and burning in anus. Piles are dependent upon abdominal plethora. ANUS IS RED AND SORE.

Diarrhoea :
© Causation: Suppression of skin disease’s and alcoholism.

¢ Time : Early in the morning; DRIVING OUT OF BED EARLY IN THE MORNING as there is lack of power in sphincter ani.-The patient runs to the closet immediately as soon as the desire is felt.

© Character: Involuntary and painless diarrhoea. The stool contains undigested food particles, whitish, greenish, very much offensive and acrid. With stool, there is REDNESS OF ANAL ORIFICE.

Modality:
* Aggravation in early morning.

© Concomitants: Diarrhoea alternates with constipation, Respiratory symptoms.

Pneumonia :

Causation: Due to suppression of skin diseases.

Stage: In delayed resolution.

Location: Usually upper left lobe of the: lung is affected.

Sensation: Chest feels heavy with oppression and burning sensation in chest.

Character of cough: Loose cough with much rattling of mucus.

Character of sputa: Greenish, purulent and sweetish expectoration.

Character of pain : There is stitching pain in the chest shooting through the back.

Dyspnoea in the middle of night with difficult respiration; wants windows open.

Modalities: Aggravation: At night and lying on back.

Amelioration: By lying on right side.

Note: Sulphur should be thought of in late stage of pneumonia when carefully selected
remedies fail to produce a favourable effect.

Female genital organs :
Menses : In dysmenorhoea arid menorrhagia.
Time: Too late.
Duration: Short.
Quantity: Scanty and sometimes it is profuse.

Character of blood: Very much black, thick, dark, acrid wherever it touches, it makes the parts sore.

Concomitants: Mense is preceded by headache if suddenly stopped. With mense, there is fulness with bearing down in pelvis towards genitals. This pressing down is felt more acutely when she stands up.

Skin :

Sulphur is indicated in all sorts of skin eruptions, vesicular, pustular, etc., especially in the skin

affections that have been treated by medicated soaps and washes, suppressed by ointment and

local medication. :
Dirty, filthy look of the skin, with filthy odour. The skin is very much sensitive to atmospheric changes. The patient does not like to be washed or bathed. There is severe itching, voluptuous itching;goes on scratching. It feels good to scratch, but scratching is followed by severe burning, rawnessand soreness of the parts.

It is also a good drug of suppuration. Every little injury suppurates (Hepar, Graph., Silicea). There are boils and abscesses, especially in summer season. The boils come in crops or a single boil is succeededby another (Arnica).

Suppression of skin diseases causes diarrhoea (Petroleum).

Modalities:
¢ Aggravation: By warmth of bed, washing, covering and at night.

e Amelioration: In open air, uncovering, by putting the feet out of bed.

Baby :
Sulphur is especially surted to psoric SCROFULOUS BABIES who are emaciated and _pot-bellied.

Dirty and filthy look of the body: YET CANNOT BEAR TO BE WASHED OR BATHED (Antim. crud., Ammon. carb.).

These type of babies surfer from morning diarrhoea which is painless and involuntary and acrid, causes REDNESS OF THE ANAL ORIFICE.

There is itching and soreness and boils which come in crops or a single boil is succeeded by another as soon as the first one is healed.

The babies are prone to have worm infestations with intense CRAVING FOR SWEETS.

The child cries before stool.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Standing, at rest, warmth of bed, washing, bathing, from alcoholic stimulants and
changeable weather.

Amelioration: Dry warm weather arid lying on right side.

Relations :
Complementary to: Aloe., Psbrinum. Calcarea must not be given before Sulphur. Sulphur is the chronic of Aconite, especially in chronic diseases. When Sulphur fails, think of Psorinum and Tuberculinum.

Follows well: Calcarea, Lyco., Sarsaparilla, Sepia.

ec - Lyco ~ Sulp ee
sulp lye O°


chapter : 197 SYMPHYTUM

Camfrey Borraginaceae

INTRODUCTION

Symphytum is a great vulnerary remedy, same as Arnica and Ruta. It is also called‘Camfrey’ and it belongs to the natural order ofBorraginaceae. It may be con-sidered theorthopaedic specific of herbal medicine.

CLINICAL

Backache, Bone-injuries of, fracture of, cancer of. Eyes—pains in, injuries of. Fractures,—non-union of. Sexual excess-effects of. Sprains.Stump-irritable, wounds,

GUYIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Symphytum facilitates union of fractured bones (Gale, phos) by favouring production of callus

2) It lessens peculier pricking pain of fracture of bones.

3) For the periosteal pain after wounds have healed or irrita-bility at point of fracture.

4) Pain in eye after mechanical injuries; bruises, fall of an obtuse body, when snow strikes the eye, or when infant thrusts its fist into its    mother’s eye.

5) Backache from excessive sexual indulgence with sper-matorrhoea.

6) Ailments from—Fractures. Injuries (to eye, bone; perios-teum) Falls. Blows. Sexual excesses.

Relations

Follows well: After Arnica for pricking pain, and soreness of periosteum remaining after an injury


chapter 199 :  SYPHILINUM

Syphilitic discharge SWAN A Nosode

INTRODUCTION

This great nosode of historical importance, has been introduced into the Homoeopathic MateriaMedica by Dr. Swan. He prepared it from thesyphilitic discharges and used it in the treatmentof syphilitic patients. He has., of course, done itempirically after potentising accordingto theDoctrine of Dynamisation. At present, it. holds theplace of the “KING OF ANTI-SYPHILITICS”amongst the nosodes so far proved. Dr. Hering remarks, “No patient having syphilitic history in the past can be declaredcured until and unless this nosode is administered at least once in the course of thetreatment. So much is its importance if adequately given”.

CLINICAL

Abscess, Alcoholism, Asthma, Boils, Constipation, Deltoid rheumatism, Dentitipn, Diplopig, Heart troubles, Headache, Leucorrhoea, Neuralgia, Ozoena, Prtosis,Rheumatism, Sciatica, Syphilis, Ulcers, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It acts chiefly on the brain and spinal cord. Bones, periosteum, skin and mucous membrane also come under the spheres of action of this drug.

PATHOGENESIS

Its action results in manifestation of various stages of syphilis in different organs, nervous symptoms, brain and heart.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Many different types of eruptions; particularly copper coloured, which become blue on getting cold.

Temperament: Melancholic temperament.

Miasm: Syphilis is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Whenever there is a history of syphilis in the patient or in the family, we should think of Syphilinum.

2. All the symptoms are WORSE AT NIGHT (MERC.), FROM SUNSET TO SUNRISE.

3. When the best selected remedy fails to relieve or permanently improve especially in syphilitic affections.

. Pain from sunset to sunrise, pain increases and decreases gradually, shifting in nature. Requires frequent changes of position.

. Leucorrhoca is profuse, soaking through the napkin and running down the heels; worse at night.

. Craving for ALCOHOL IN ANY FORM. Hereditary tendency to alcoholism.

. Ptosis, paralysis of superior oblique muscles of the eye, sleepy look from drooping lids.

. Teeth decay at edges of gums and break off; edges are serrated; dwarfed in size,

converge at their tips.

. Obstinate constipation for years; rectum seems tied up with stricture.

Rheumatism of trie shoulder joint or at insertion of deltoid.

Mind : Loss of memory. Loses remembrance of present occurrences Cannot recollect the names, dates, persons, places, etc. Arithmetical calculations are verydifficult. Sensation as if going to be insane; as if about to be paralysed, apathy andindifference, Terrible dread of night on account of the mental and physicalexhaustion on awaking. It is intolerable and death is preferable. Fears the terrificsuffering from exhausting on awaki:g.

12. Ailments from : Syphilis.

PARTICULARS

Eye:

In ophthalmia neonatorum, chronic and recurrent phlyctenular inflammation of cornea, this remedy is indicated as follows:

Location: Especially in the left eye. Successive crops of phlyctenule and abrasion of epithelial layer of cornea.

Character of pain: There is intense sharp, pulsating pain with intense photophobia. Lids are

swollen and adhere during sleep. Furthermore, there is ptosis consequent upon paralyisis of superior oblique muscle of the eye. Sleepy look from drooping lids. Diplopia, one image seen below the other.

Modalities:
 Aggravation: From 2 to 5 a.m., at night.

 Amelioration: By cold application.

Headache :

Causation: Sunstroke, excitement and syphilis.

Location: Across the temple.

Sensation: As if head would be crushed, with sense of weight and bursting in the vertex.

Character of pain: Neuralgic pain, intolerable pain. Violent pain in the whole head with red face,

enlarged veins of the face, restless and sleepless night. Lancinating pain in the eyes. Pain increases and decreases gradually. Pains frequently shifting place with change of position.

Modality: Aggravation at night, from dusk to daylight, from heat of sun, from 10-11 p.m.

Mouth :

Causation: Syphilitic and fungal infection of mouth.

Sensation: Mouth feels as if ulcerated and burns like FIRE. Tongue coated white; edges indented by teeth. Two deep cracks, running lengthwise on it; one on either side of the median line. Ulceration of thetongue, lips, buccal cavity and fauces which smart and burn like fire.

Character of pain: Smarting pain in the mouth. Teeth decay at edges of the gum and break off; edges serrated and dwarfed in size with convergent tips. Excessive flow of saliva.

Modality: Aggravation: At night and from mastication.

Constipation :

Causation: Syphilitic affection.

Sensation: As if the rectum is tied’up with strictures.

Character: Obstinate constipation for years. Rectum seems to be tied up with strictures, when enema was used the agony of passage was like that of labour. Chronic constipation with foetid breath.Stool is light or dark coloured and very offensive. Character of the pain is like that of labour.

Modality: Aggravation by passing stool.

Heart :

Lancinating pain in the heart at night, from base to apex. Better at high altitude and aggravation at sea shore and at night (Pain from apex to base, Med.; from base to shoulder, Spigelia).

Leucorrhoea :

Yellow offensive leucorrhoea, very muh offensive and profuse. It daily soaks through napkin with pain across the small of the back.

Bones :
Causation: Syphilitic affection.

Location : Especially in long bones of upper and lower extremities.

Inflammation of all joints; rheumatism. Pain and swelling in limbs with stiffness. Severe pain in long bones, particularly extremities preventing sleep. Caries of cervical and dorsal vertebrae.

Character of pain: Severe, lancinating pain from sunset to sunrise. Pain comes gradually and goes
away slowly.

Modalities:
Aggravation: From hot application; warmth of bed; at night and extremes of heat and cold.

Amelioration: From pouring cold water on affected parts, from walking and at daybreak.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: At night, from twilight to daylight and at sea shore.

Amelioration: At high altitude.

Relations :

Compare: Aurum, Mercurius and Phytolacca in syphilitic affections.


chapter : 200 SYZYGIUM JAMBOLANUM

Jambul Myrtaceae

CLINICAL

Diabetes melitus. Prickly heat. Ulcers:

It is a native of India, The tincture is prepared from pow-dered seeds. The fruit is ofthe size of grapes, black in colour and tastesdelicious.It is a most useful remedy in diabetesmelitus as it causes a marked diminution ofsugar in urine. Great thirst, weakness, emaciation inspite ofproper nutriti-ous diet, profuse urination of highspecific gravity, are the characteristic indications. Prickly heat in upper part of the body. Small red pimples with much itching.This is also one of the important symptoms which the author has verified (can be givenexter-nally and internally).It is also to be thought of in old ulcers of skin associated with diabetes melitus.

chapter :201 TABACUM

Tobacco Solanaceae

INTRODUCTION

The symptoms of the pathogenesis are composed partly of provings made by LembkeSchreter and others and partly of poisonings andoverdosings.

CLINICAL

Amaurosis, Angina  Pectoris. Asthma. Backache. Cholera. Constipation. Diarrhoea.Headache. Hiccough. Pregnancy sickness. Renalcolic. Sea sickness. Vertigo etc. Hypertension.Heart-dilatation of.

SPHERES OF ACTION

It has profound, action on nerves espe-cially Vagi and Heart. It also acts on eyes, G.I. Tract, and urinary system.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes cerebal irritation followed by marked irritation of functions of Vagi. It produces muscular prostration, free secretions. It produces (brings forth) symptoms,which are experienced by people who had taken tobacco first time in their lives such asnausea, vomiting, salivation, giddiness even one may faint with prostation and coldsweating.

CONSTITUTION

Make-up : Patient is emaciated, pale, blue, sunken, Emaciation of cheeks and back. Sometimes deathly pallorness covered with cold sweat.

Heat cold relation : Hot patient.

Miasm : All the 3 miasms are in the background but it is chiefly an antipsoric Temedy.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Deathly nausea, vomiting, and giddiness with death like pallor.

2) Vertigo on opening the eyes (on closing the eyes—Lach., Thuja., Theri.)

3) Icy coldness of surface; covered with cold sweat.

4) A weak, faint sinking feeling at pit of stomach.

5) Child wants abdomen uncovered which relieves nausea & vomiting.

6) Sea sickness—Aggravated by least motion and relieved on deck in fresh cold air Car Sickness—Coccul., Petrol. Air Sickness—Bell., Mountain    Sickness—Coca, Home Sickness—Caps.

7) Sensation of excessive wretchedness and great despon-dency.

8) Symptoms occur in paroxysms such as asthma, sick headache, vertigo, sneezing.

9) Palpitation violent when lying on left side and goes off when turning to the right.

10) Many symptoms are aggravated on least motion (compare Ipe., Bry., Lob. In.)

11) Ailments from—abuse of tobacco, masturbation, at sea, shock, violent physical exertion.

PARTICULARS

Headache

It is needed in periodical sick headache which begins in the morning increases during day and last of until evening (Sang C., Spig. Nat M, Nat Carb. etc.) and lastig one or two days.

Location : Whole head especially right side.

Sensation : Pain as if struck by a hammer or club. Tight feeling as from band (Gels., Spig. etc.)

Modalities : Aggravation—by noise light, motion.

Amelioration : in open fresh air.

Concomitant : Deathly nausea and vomiting. There may be vertigo on opening the eyes.

Vertigo

Vertigo on opening the eyes is a strong feature of this remedy. It increases loss of consciousness with death like pallor. Vertigo on rising or looking upward and is relieved in open fresh air and by vomiting.

Eyes

It has a good action over the eyes. Dim sighted—Sees as through a veil.

Amaurosis—From atrophy of retina or optic nerve. Fre-quent recurrence of amblyopia. It is also to be thought of in stravismus when depending upon brain troubles. Heart

It has been recommended in dilatation of the heart caused by a shock or violent physical exertion and in angina with high tension,

Sensation : Constriction of throat and tightness feeling across the upper part of the chest.

Pain :Pain in praecordial region. Pain radiates from centre of sternum.

Pulse :Feeble, imperceptible and intermittent.

Modality : Aggravation on least motion, indoor (in warm room) relieved in open fresh cold air, uncovering.



Concomitant—There is paroxysmal oppression, tinnitus aurium, muscae volitantes with violent palpitation when lying on left side and pallor of skin. Mind calm and no fear of death.

Sweat—Cold clammy sweating with coldness of body.

Gastro-intestinal tract:

Stomach :

Causation—tobacco, going at sea, during cholera.


Sensation : There is terrible, faint, sinking feeling at pit of stomach and sensation of hanging or relaxation of stomach with incessant nausea and vomiting (Ipecac)

Nausea : With faintness; worse smell of tobacco smoke and better in open air. Vomiting with cold sweat and worse on least motion. It is also useful in vomiting during pregnancy with much _ spitting.

Abdomen : Patient wants abdomen uncovered which relieves nausea and vomiting. Coldness in abdomen (Colch., Lach.)

Rectum : Constipation—Chronic constipation of years standing due to inactivity of bowel or paralysis of rectum, spasm of anal sphincter.

Diarrhoea : Sudden with nausea, vomiting, prostration, cold sweat and extreme fainting from smell of tobacco. Stool is yellowish, greenish, slimy, watery sometimes may look like sour milk.

Urinary : Renal colic with violent spasmodic pains along left ureter accompanied by deathly nausea and cold perspiration. (Right Ureteric Colic-Ocimum Can.)

General modalities :

Aggravation : from motion, from lying on left side, from heat, in warm room, extremes of heat and cold.

Amelioration : Open fresh cold air, uncovering, from cold application.

Relations

Antidotes for abuse of tobacco are —

For ailments from tobacco chewing—Arsenic
For hiccough from tobacco chewing—Ignatia
For excessive nauses & vomiting—Ipecac.
For occipital headache and vertigo from excessive smoking—Gelsemium.
For importency caused by tobacco smoking—Lycopodium.
For gastric symptoms next morning after smoking—Nux Vomica.
For palpitation, tobacco heart & sexual weakness—Phosphorus.
For tobacco dyspepsia, neuralgia & chronic nervousness— Sepia.
For tobacco toothache—Clematis & Plantago Major,
For cough excited by tobacco smoke—Staphy. & Spongia.
N.B.: Caladium and Plantago Major destroy craving for tobacco. Tabacum also relieves terrible Craving when use is discontinued.

Antidoted by : Vinegar, sour apples, Camphor,

Antidotes : Bad effects of Cicuta Virosa.
 

chapter: 202 TARAXACUM

Dandelion Compositae

INTRODUCTION

This remedy deserves mention by reasons of its curative value in affections ofthe liver, such as gallstone, bilious attacks,jaundice & typhoid fever.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Mapped tongue (Lach, Merc, Nat. M.) covered with a white film withsensation of rawness. This film comesoff in patches, leaving dark       red,tender, very sensitive spots.

2) Jaundice with enlargement & induration of liver.

3) Debility and profuse night sweats, esp. when convalesc-ing from bilious or typhoid fever.

4) Loss of appetite.

5) Gastric headaches with sensation of great-heat on top of head & mapped tongue. There may be jaundiced skin.

6) Limbs are very restless & painful to touch, in typhoid fever (Rhus., Zin.)

7) Fever Chill—Chilliness after eating & aggravated by drinking.

Heat : Heat stage without thirst. Heat in face & in toes. During fever finger tips cold & bitter taste in mouth. Sweat—Perspiration on falling asleep.

General Modalities :

Aggravation : Almost all symptoms appear when sitting ; lying down ; resting.
Relations :

Compare : Bry, chel., Hydr., Nux in gastric and bilious affections.




chapter :203 TARENTULA CUBENSIS

Cuban Spider Aranaediceae

INTRODUCTION

Though it is not a polychrest medicine as it has limited sphere of action, still it has got thepower to make Surgeon’s knife useless andrelieves the most serious cases of blood boils,carbuncle, felons and gangrene etc. In Allen’sKeynote Tarentula Hispania & Tarentula cubensis both are given under one heading“Tarantula” though they are different medicines. Tarentula cubensis is a largerspider of a dark brown colourless poisonousvariety & covered with more hair than theTarentula Hispania. Tarentula Cubensis is prepared from the whole hairy spider. This spider is very
poisonous.

Clinical

Anthrax. Abscess. Carbuncle. Fever. Felon. Gangrene. Septic Fever. Ulcer etc.

Tarentula cubensis is a medicine for above mentioned dis-eases when there is severe type inflammations and septic conditions and even malignancy, if the following symptoms are present.

1) Atrocious burning pains, stinging pains, make the patient restless and compels him to walk at night. It is the remedy for pains of death.

2) Bluish, purple, discolouration of affected part with swelling.

3) Very early & persistent prostration.

4) Intermittent septic chills.

5) Hyperaesthesia relieved by constant movement & some kind of friction.

6) Modalities :

Aggravation—at night, contact, touch of affected parts

Amelioration—Rubbing affected parts,

Dr. Benthack says Tarentula Cubensis and Arsenicum Alb, are complementary to ach other in septic inflammatory states,

chapter : 204 TARENTULA HISPANIA

Spanish Spider NUNEZ Aranedacae

INTRODUCTION

Tarentula is a deep and long acting medicine. This spider is very poisonous in nature. Thosewho are bitten by this spider or those whoimagine them-selves to have been bitten by itdevelop “Tarantism” which means dancingmania.

CLINICAL

Chorea. Epilepsey. Hysteria. Paralysis agitans, Nymphomania. Multiple _ sclerosis.Pruritus vul-vae. Tabes dorsalis. etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Many symptoms of body are confined to right side. Its main action is over the nervous system espe-cially the termini of nerves, genito-urinary system.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS
1) Restlessness : Cannot keep quiet in any position, must keep in motion though walking aggravates all symptoms.

2) Constant movement of the legs, arms, trunk with inability to do anything.

3) Hyperaesthesia—Least excitement irritates followed by languid sadness, especially of tips of finger.

4) Very sensitive to music. It relieves nearly all symptoms but sometimes it excites violently.

5) Craves raw food ; aversion to food & meat.

6) Thirst for cold water.

7) Extreme sexual desire leading to mania.

8) Annual Periodicity of symptoms is marked. (Ars, Garb. Veg, Lach, Siilph, Thuja)

9) At every menstrual period tongue, mouth & throat get intolerably dry especially while sleeping.

10) Cough only relieved from smoking.

Mind : Anxiety of mind and body. Cardiac anxiety is promi, nent. Strong aversion to striking colours such as green, red & black. Very sensitive to music. It relieves all symptoms, but sometime it excites violently. Loss of shame, lascivious, uncontrollable sexual desire.



twentla Hispania

Tarentula patient feigns all sorts of sickness. They not only imagine themselves sick but they pretend to be sick, when they are not. When there are no observers there is nohysteria but when attention is directed to her, she beging to twitch.

Violence is a strong feature of this remedy. Strikes her attendant, nurse, tears cloths. In short Tarentula patient has foxy cunning and destructive mentality. Consolationcauses weeping. Relief in the evening after eating.

NERVOUS SYSTEM :

Extra irritability of Nervous system especially termini of nerves is the red strand of Tarentula. We notice choreic affec-tion of the whole body or right arm and left leg.Constant movement of legs, arms, trunk with inability to do anything.

Twitching and jerking of muscles. Hyperaesthesia aggravated by touch of affected parts but relieved by rubbing the affected parts. Restlessness—must keep in motionthough it aggra-vates. Relieved by music but sometimes it excites violently.

GENERAL MODALITY :

Aggravation—motion, contact, touch of affected parts, noise, change of weather.

Amelioration : In open air, music, rubbing affected parts.

RELATION :

Antidote : Lachesis.

When Arsenic is well selected but fails, then think of Tarentula. In dry itching eczema when Arsenic & Sulphur fail.

Similar to—Apis, Crotalus, Lach, Platina, Mygale, Naja, Theridion.

chapter:205  TEREBINTHINA

Oil of turpentine A volatile oil

INTRODUCTION

The oil of turpentine, a clear colourless liquid is obtained by the distillation of the exudationfrom certain varieties of the pine. Terebinthina was introduced to homoeopathy by Hartlaub. A proving of it appeared inHartlaub and Trinks’ Annalen. Many symptomshave been added from poisonings and over-dosings in old-school practice.

CLINICAL

Albuminuria, Cystitis, Dropsy, Diarrhoea.Enteric fever. Haematuria Kidneys-Congestion of, neuralgia of. Purpura haemorrhagica. Scarlatina, Sciatica. Strangury. Tympanitis. Uraemia. Urine-suppression of. Worms.

Spheres of action & Pathogenesis : This remedy has a selec-tive affinity for mucous membrances of kidneys ; bladder and urethra, also respiratory and gastrointestinal tract.It also acts on heart, blood and skin. It checks haemorrhage from the bowels, kidneys,bladder, lungs, uterus and anus, spe-cially when the ejected blood shows signs ofdegeneration.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) Tongue : Tongue symptoms of Terebinthina are very characteristics for the selection of a remedy than any other symptoms.

(a) Tongue smooth, glossy, red, as if deprived of pa-pillae or as if glazed. The papillae may be elevated.

(b) The coating of tongue peels off in patches leaving bright red spots, or entire coating cleans off suddenly.

(c) Dry and red tongue with burning sensation on tip.

2) The urine has violet i.e. sweetish odour.

3) Excessive tympanitis : abdomen is extremely sensitive to touch and distended with flatulence.

4) Haematuria : In haematuria the character of urine is cloudy, smoky, albuminous and blood is thoroughly, mixed with the urine. There is coffee    ground sediment.Painless haematuria with profuse, dark or black urine.

5) Violent burning and drawing pains in Kidneys, bladder and urethra (Berb., Canth, Can. S.)

6) Albuminuria : It is ::ecd: | in a: ite or in ear]:' stages of albuminuria when blood and albumin amount more than ~as.s end_pithelium.    Albuminuria after diptheria, scarlatina and typhoid.

7) In cystitis and retention from atony of fundus of bladder, there is violent burning and cutting in bladder with sen-sitive hypogastrium and    tenesmus.

g) Ascites with anasarca in organic lesions of kidneys. Dropsy after scarlatina.

9) Congestion & inflammation of viscera, such as kidneys, bladder, lungs, intestines, uterus with haemorrhage & malignant tendency.

10) Haemorrhages from bowels are passive, dark with ulcer-ations or epithelial degenerations.

11) Purpura haemorrhagica where fresh ecchymoses in great numbers from day to day (Sulph. acid).

12) Diarrhoea : In diarrhoea character of stool is watery, greenish, mucous. There is also frequent, profuse, foetid bloody stools. During stool     there is severe burning in anus & rectum. After stool patient becomes faint and exhausted.

13) Worms : It is indicated in ascarides lumbrici & tape worm segments passed on the basis of following symptoms : Foul breath with chocking     sensation in throat. Dry hack-ing cough. Tickling at anus.

14) Ailments from : Alcohol. Damp Cellars.


GENERAL MODALITIES :

Agg : Dampness. Cold. Night-lying. Pressure.

Amel: Motion.

RELATIONS :

Compare Alumen, Arnica, Arsenic, Cantharis, Lachesis, Nit. ac.

Antidote—Phosphorus.

N.B. : Terebinthina is recommended as prophylactic in Malarial & African fevers.

chapter: 206

THERIDION CURASSAVICUM

Orange Spider HERING Araneideae

INTRODUCTION

rm,

Mciistiun we introduced and proved by Hering in 1822. Th: orange Spider is found in theWest Indies chiefly in the island of Curacoa. It isabout vhe s'%2 of a cherry—stone and is found onorange tees in addition to its habitat, it hasorang? 7olv-1red spots on the posterior part of the body, end a large square yellow spot on the belly.

CLINICAL

Bone-affections of Caries, Cough, Eye-teeth pain in Headache. Hysteria. Nausea. Necrosis.Nose-catarrh of Phthisis Florida, Pregnancy, sickness of Rickets. Scrofulosis. Seasickness, Spinal irritation. Toothache, Vertigo.

SPHERES OF ACTION & PATHOGENESIS

This remedy chiefly acts on nervous system, bones, head, chest and teeth. It produces hypersensitiveness of nerves & causes spinal irritation. It affects the bones causing carries & necrosis.

CONSTITUTION

In Theridion there is no worth mentioning look of the patient, however, patient is hysterical and sensative to cold. It is chiefly an anti-psoric and anti-syphilitic remedy.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Every sound seems to penetrate through the whole body, causing nausea & vertigo.

2) Vertigo on closing the eyes (Lach., Thuja) and from any, even least noise.

3) Nausea, esp. oh closing the eyes, from least motion and from fast riding in a carriage.

4) Toothache : every shrill sound penetrates the teeth.

5) For Extreme nervous sensitiveness : of puberty, during pregnancy and climacteric years.

6) Seasickness of nervous women : they close their eyes to get rid of the motion of the vessel and grow deathly sick.

7) Headache : When begining to move.

Location : Forehead & temples.

Theridion Curassavicum 613

Sensation : There is sensation of a dull heavy pressure behind the eyes and violent deep in the brain.

Character of pain : There is pressing pain intemples & pulsating pain over the left eye and across forehead. Pain in forehead extending to occiput.

Modalities: Aggravation, lying down, from least motion of head, from others walking on the floors.

Concomitant: Vertigo with dim vision, nausea, and vomiting like seasickness.

8) Discharge of thick, yellow greenish, offensive mucus in chronic nasal catarrh, Ozena.

9) Violent stitches in upper left chest, below the scapula, extending to neck (Apis, Myr., Fix., Sulph.).

10) Great sensitiveness between vertebrae, sits sideways in a chair to avoid pressure as against spine (Chin. S.).; Worse by least noise and jar     of foot on floor.

11) Pain in the bones all over, as if broken.

12) Mind : Mentally patient is sad and depressed. He is hysterical, restless, finds pleasures in nothing, aversion to work and to his business.     Time passes too quickly {too slowly, Arg. Nit., Can., I., Nux. M.).

13) Ailments from : Seatravelling, riding, washing clothes.

GENERAL MODALITIES :

Aggravation : Noise, touch, closing eyes, less motion, riding, jar.

Amelioration : Rest, warmth.

RELATION :

Antidoted by—Acon., Mosch,, Graph. Follows well—Sulph., Calec., Lyco.

N.B.:

1. It is recommended in Scrofulosis where the best chosen remedies fail to relieve.

2. It often effects a cure in phthisis florida if given in the early stages of disease.

3. “In rachitis, caries, necrosis, it apparently goes to the root of the evil and destroys the cause”—Dr. Brauch.

chapter: 207 Shepherd’s Purse Cruciferae

INTRODUCTION

It is one of the important anti haemorrhagic remedies of our MateriaMedica and is frequently used by us tocontrol uterine haemorrhage. In thisrespect it stands near the Sabina.

CLINICAL

Abortion : haemorrhage after. Dysuria, Haematuria, Haemorrhages, Leucorrhoea,Metror-rhagia, Uterus-cancer of. RenalCaleculi. Fibroma.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Profuse, passive haemorrhage from every outlet of the body where the character of blood is dark & clotted.

2) Metrorrhagia—wth violent cramps and uterine colic ; after abortion ; miscarriage or labour, with cancer uteri.

3) Menses : Too early & too profuse. Protracted, tardy instarting; first day merely a show ; second day colic, vomiting, haemorrhage with large    clots ; each alternateperiod more profuse. Exhausting haemorrhage from uterine inertia, scarcelyrecovers from one period before another    begins.

4) Haemorrhage accompanying uterine fibroid.

5) Leucorrhoea before and after menses (Graph.) ; bloody, dark offensive ; stains difficult to Wash off.

6) Urinary symptoms : It is one of the anti Uric acid remedies and useful in renal colic, chornic cystitis, dysuria, haematuria and albuminuria    during gestation, etc.There is frequent desire for urine with heavy urine containing brickdustsediment and phosphates.

RELATIONS

Compare : Sinapis, Trillium, Viburnum, Ustilago.

chapter : 208 THUJA OCCIDENTALIS

Arbor Vitae

White cedar HAHNEMANN 

Tree of life

INTRODUCTION

Thuja IS ONE OF HAHNEMANN’S GREATEST DISCOVERIES. Most of themedicines of his Materia Medica had been in vogue as therapeutic tools beforehis time. Of the therapeutic properties ofThuja, practically nothing was known until Hahnemann proved it. Subsequenobservers have only confirmed thepathogenesis proved and established byHahnemann. He specified it as “THEONLY EFFICACIOUS REMEDY FORFIG WARTS AND GONORRHOEA”. Hahnemann found in Thuja the antidote to the miasmatic condition which he termed. SYCOSIS, meaning thereby the constitutional } wor disease resulting from gonorrhoea and having its characteristic manifestations, viz.> ah excrescences in the form of warts, sometimes dry, more frequently soft and spongy, emitting a foetid fluid having a sweetish odour, bleeding readily and having acauliflower-like from.

CLINICAL

Abdomen distended, Abortion, Angina pectoris, Asthma, Cancer, Chorea, Condylomata, Constipation, Convulsion, Diarrhoea, Epilepsy, Eye affection, Gleet,Gonorrhoea, Haemorrhoids, Headache, Polypus, Prostatic disorders, Rheumatism, Tea—bad effects of, Teeth affection, Urinary affection, Vaccination, Warts, Whooping cough, ete.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Thuja acts on skin and genito-urinary organs. It has also got action on the nervous system, especially the brain, gastrointestinal tract, etc.


PATHOGENESIS

As far as the pathogenesis of the drug is concerned, HERING states that it has too many characteristic actions.

On the fluids: “Dissolution of fluids of the body, which become acrid, probably caused by Thuja which perverts lymphatic secretions; disturbs digestion and sanguinification.”

In the vegetative sphere: A surplus of life producing matter undergoes nearly unlimited proliferation in the shape of pathological vegetations, in the shape of


condylomata, warts, sycotic excrescences, spongy tumours and spongy pock exudates which organise hastily. All morbid manifestations are excessive, but appear quietly 39that the beginning of the diseased state is scarcely.known. Extra unwanted growths, bywhatever name it may be called, in any and every tissue of the body, are caused by thisgreat “KING OF ANTI-SYCOTIC DRUGS, THUJA”.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: Hydrogenoid constitution of Grauvogl (Antim. tart., Natrum. sulph., Medorrhinurn).Thuja is suited to patient having hydrogenoid constitution(possessing an increased capacity to contain more and more water in the cytoplasm of thecells; hence rain, cold, damp weather, vegetable food, etc., which increases the number ofmolecules of water in the system, aggravate the symptoms). The patients are fleshyhaving undue and unwanted growths, such as warts, tumours, cysts, etc., having darkhair and dark complexion; unhealthy, oily, greasy skin, bearing warty excrescences anddirty brownish white spots all over the body.

SYCOTIC DYSCRASIA

According to Dr. B.K. Bose of Calcutta, Thuja patients, look like “GANESJI”, with distended abdomen and bulky body, having-lavish growth of various tissues everywhere.

Temperament: Lymphatic temperament; sluggish in action and perception. Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient (Boericke).

Miasm: Sycosis is in the background. Thuja is the king of anti-sycotic remedies.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Fig-warts, condylomata and wart-like excrescences upon the mucous membrane and cutaneous surfaces of the body.

2. Thuja bears the same relation to sycosis that Sulphur does to psora and Mercury to syphilis.

3. Thuja is a left-sided drug. Left side principally affected; left ovaryrl left testis, left side of abdomen, left kidney, etc.

4. The medicine should be thought of in bad effects of vaccination (Silicea, Antim. tart.,
   Mezerium, Crotalus hor.).

5. Mucopurulent, copious foul smelling discharges from all the mucus membranes of the body.

6. There is SWEAT ONLY ON THE UNCOVERED PARTS OR ALL OVER, EXCEPTING THE HEAD, ESPECIALLY AT NIGHT WHEN HE SLEEPS.Sweating stops when he wakes (China, Con., Cactus—sweat only during wakinglhours, Sambucus), Perspiration on genitals smells like honey.

7. There is vertigo WHEN CLOSING THE EYES (Lachesis).

8. Teeth decay at the roots, crowns remain sound.

9. Coition prevented by extreme sensitiveness of the vagina.

10. Suppressed gonorrhoea causing particular rheumatism; PROSTATITIS, IMPOTENCY, CONDYLOMATA, TUMOURS AND CYSTS AND MANY CONSTITUTIONAL TROUBLES.

. Desire for salt, cold food and drinks.

. Thuja is especially suited if diarrhoea results due to bad effects of vaccination; gushing, watery and in the morning. “BREAK FAST”       diarrhoea, like water coming out of a bunghole.

13. Mind : Thuja patient has FIXED IDEAS. This is a striking phenomenon which
reminds us of this drug. The ideas are like the following : As if— A strange person is at his side. The soul and body are separated. He is under the control of some superhuman being.

Something alive is moving in the abdomen.

The body, especialy the limbs are. MADE UP OF GLASS AND WOULD BREAK EASILY.

The lower limbs are made up of wood, the sensation comes particularly when walking.

Urine is trickling in urethra.

Flesh was beaten and scrapped from the bones.

A nail had been driven into the parietal bone.

A convex button, was pressed on the head.

Music is unbearable for the Thuja patient. It causes her weep (Aconite, Graphites, Sabina, Natrum Carb. Nat. Sulph.)

Slowness and sluggishness prevail all over the mental sphere. The patient is highly forgetful. Loss of memory. Insane women will not like to be touched or approached. On the border line of insanity.

14. Aliments from : Suppressed and maltreated gonorrhoea, vaccination, tea, coffee, onion, fatty food, sweets, tobacco, sexual excess, sunstroke, abuse of Sulphur and

Mercury.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Headache is caused by exposure to heat, sun sunstroke; overating, sexual excess, tobacco, tea, coffee, suppression of gonorrhoea and syphilis. The headache is chronic and of sycotic or Syphilitic origin.

Location: Usually left temple and left parietal bones are affected.

Sensation: Sensation as if the head was forced and as if pierced by a nail through the parietal bone (Ign., Coffea).

Character: There is violent congestion with heaviness in occiput. Headache in the morning. There is boring pain through the temples. Screwing in the frontal eminence or temples as if a convex button was pressed upon the part.

Modalities: Headache is worse from sexual excess, overeating, tea, coffee, exposure to heat and sun. Relieved by exercise, in the open air, looking up and turning the head upwards.

Cow-e >» jtants: The patient is peevish and tacitum with numbness of brain. Scalp is very sensitive to hen closing the eyes, ceases on opening them.

In KERAT;T!:, SYPHILITIC IRITIS AND OPHTHALMIA NEONATORUM this remedy is infallible. In ophthalmia neonatorum, if the mother is suffering from gonorrhoea the child gets the infection duringthe process of parturition while passing through the vaginal canal and uro-genital tract.

There is large granulations like warts or blisters.

There is burning, tearing pain, in open air. Eyelids are agglutinated at night; dry, scaly styes and tarsal tumours, chalazae, thick hard knots,
 
like small condylomata after Staphisagria partially relieves butdoesmot-cure. Ciliary neuralgia, affecting the face and head.

Modalities:
 Aggravation by uncovering. If uncovered, feels as if a cold stream of air were blowing out through the uncovered parts.

 Amelioration by warmth and convering.

Ears:

In the ear, there are growths like polypi and condylomata. Chronic otitis exuding profuse, purulent, acrid, offensive discharges. Cramp like pain in the external ear.

Teeth :

There is toothache from tea drinking. Teeth decay at root, crown remains sound (Mezereum, Crown decay and root intact, Merc. sol. Edges decay, Staphisagria. Teeth decay as soon as they beginio appear.Kreosote). Teeth crumble and turn yellow.

“On blowing the nose, a pressing pain is felt in the hollow of the tooth or at the side of it’— BOENNINGHAUSEN.

Nose :

Chronic catarrh; mucus is thick and green, mixed sometimes with blood and pus. On blowing the nose, there is pain in teeth. Dry nasal cavity with ulcerated nostril which is very painful, especially whenpressing the root of nose. Ozaena with thick greenish discharge is also noticed. Chronic catarrh afterexanthemata.

Gastro-intestinal tract :

Throat : There is large tenacious mucus which the patient hawks up with difficulty. Throat is dry and rough. Swallowing of saliva is very painful.

Abdomen : There is complete loss of appetite. Food is tasteless. Bitter, rancid eructation and tasting of ingesta. Painful pressure in the pit of stomach. Cramps every evening with induration in the stomach.




There is sinking senstation in the epigastrium before food. There is chronic dyspepsia in habitual tea drinkers.

Sensation as if an animal was crying in the abdomen, or something alive was moving within the stomach, or something protrudes here and there like the limbs of a foetus. There may be flatulence and distension, with rumbling and colic.

Left ovarian region is very Sensitive. Left ovary is inflamed; worse at each menstrual period. There is burning sensation while walking or riding; must lie down.

Diarrhoea :

 Causation ; Vaccination, onion, tea and coffee, bread, butter and fatty food, damp air and breakfast.

 Symptoms before stool: Rumbling of flatulence in abdomen.

 Symptoms during stool: There is great accumulation of gas causing distension of abdomen. Stool is forcibly discharged as if water is passing through a bunghole, with rumbling and colicky pain in abdomen.

 Character of stool: Profuse, pale, yellow, watery, oily or greasy, bloody stool.

 Symptoms after stool: There is great debility.

 Modality: Aggravated in the morning, after breakfast, after vaccination, from onion and tea.

 Concomitants: Anus fissured, painful to touch, surrounded by flat warts or moist mucous condylomata.

Thuja may also be thought of in cases of chronic diarrhoea in persons having hydrogenoid constitution with a history of maltreated or suppressed gonorrhoea, with desire for cold food and drink.

Constipation

In case of chronic constipation, WHEN STOOL PARTLY GOES BACK AFTER BEING PARTLY EXPELLED (Sil.) Passage of stool produces violent rectal pain which ultimately compels the patient tocease the effort. Anus is fissured and painful to touch, surrounded by flat warts or moist mucouscondylomata. Along with constipation, piles may also appear, which is swollen and painful, Pain is moresevere while sitting.

Urine :

 Causation: Chronic incontinence of urine from paralysis of sphincter vesicae, with gonorrhoea!
urethritis.

 Location: Orifice of urethra is agglutinated with mucus.

 Sensation; Burning sensation in urethra, especially in the morning and during day.

Concomitants: Yellowish discharge from urethra with chordae.

Skin :

The skin looks very unhealthy. Warts on any part of the body, with a little stalk called fig-warts, tubular warts, flat warts, black senile warts, even condylomata may be seen. Dirty brownish colour of the skin, brownish-white, mottled spots on the skin. There may also be white, scaly, dry eruptions on the skin.



Eruptions burn violently after scratching. Eruptions are on covered parts only.

Pustular eruptions, like smallpox. Boenninghausen found in Thuja both the preventive and the curative in an epidemic of smallpox. Thuja aborts the process and prevents pitting.

Modality: Majority of cutaneous eruptions are relieved by touch.

Intermittent fever :

Attacks of chill come at different times of the day, mostly towards the evening, AT 3 P.M. AND 3 A.M. Chill usually on left side of the body. Chill begins in thighs. Feels cold to touch. Wants to cover up the body. Chill without thirst, after midnight and in early morning. Internal chill with external heat and great thirst. Heat in the evening, especially on face. Dry heat on covered parts. Muscles feel as if beaten.

Sweat stage follows heat. Sweat on first going to sleep. Sweat on uncovered parts only with dry heat on covered parts. Sweat immediately after the chill without thirst. Sweat is often greasy, sometimesoffensive or smelling, sweetish like honey, oh genitals. Sweat appears especially during sleep.

Any complaint, such as rheumatism, prostatitis, impotency or growths and constitutional troubles linked with suppressed or maltreated gonorrhoea make one think of Thuja.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: Tiere is general aggravation at night, at 3 p.m. and 3 a.m. from cold, damp air, cold water, after taking breakfast, fat, coffee, tea, vaccination, by heat of bed, spirituous liquors, tobacco,touch, bright light and blowing the nose.

Amelioration: In open air, warmth, by movement, pressure, rubbing and scratching.


Relations :

Complementary to: Medorrhinum, Sabina, Silicea.

Compare: Cannabis sativa, Staph.

Follows well: After Medorrhinum, Mercurius sol., Nit. ac.

Thuja should be given at bed time for better results like Nux vom.

chapter :209

THYROIDINUM

Dried thyroid gland of Sheep or calf (A Sarcode)

INTRODUCTION

This remedy may be prepared either from the dried triturated thyroid gland ofthe sheep or calf or from extract made fromit. To be able to arrive at a proper under-standing of its symptomatology one shouldconsider the physiology of the gland. Theadministration of thyroid gland in largedoses acclerates protein and fat metabolismand causes increased elimination ofnitrogen, phosphorus, chlorine etc.Clinically polyuria, sweating, tachycardia,tre-mor, emaciation and glycosuria are observed. The removal of the thyroid glandon the other hand leads to anaemia, oligaemia, myxoedema, cretinism and obesity.

CLINICAL

Albuminuria, Amenorrhoea. Anaemia. Convul-sion. Cretinism. Dropsy. Eczema. Fractures. Goitre, Milk deficiency, Hysteroepilepsy. Myxaedema. Obesity. Psoriasis. Headache. Enuresis. Rheumatic Arthritis. Undesce’nded testicle.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Thyroidinum acts upon glandular system especially thyroid gland, female genitalia, skin, nerves, blood, bones etc. 

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) It is suited to thin or obese persons with an irregular deposition of fat, but are usually pale and anaemic. There may be exophthalmic look.

2) Chilly patient. There is sensation of chilliness with increased sensitivity to cold and aggravation from cold.

3) A state of puffiness and obesity may be regarded as a keynote indication for Thyrodinum—clarke.

4) Tachycardia.

5) Palpitation : From least exertion (Calc. Ars.)

6) Excessive sweating.

7) Craving for sweet.

8) Thirst for cold water.

9) Trembling of limbs in the entire body.

10) Coldness and tingling in extremeties.

11) Poly urea : Urine contains some albumen and sugar.

12) Persistent frontal headache.

18) Nausea : Worse riding in car with much flatulency.

14) Mentally patient is highly irritable. Can’t bear least opposition and goes into passions about trifles. Depres-sion. Stupour alternates with     restless melancholia. Attimes becomes homicidal patient want to strangle every body by putting his armsvery tightly round their necks.

15) It is said to be useful in undescended testicles in boys.

16) It is indicated in deficient milk secretion specially when associated with return of menses.

17) Convulsions : during dentition without fever.

18) Chronic and obstinate diarrhoea of under nourished chil-dren during dentition.

19) History of repeated premature delivery and abortions of obscure nature.

20) Desperate cases of Jaundice in the new born babies.

PARTICULARS

Head

Persistent frontal headache. Feeling of lightness in brain. Eyeballs prominent. Fullness & heat in head with flushed face.

Eyes

Prominent Eyeballs. Progressive diminution of sight with central scotoma.

Stomach

Desire for sweets and thirst. for cold water. Nausea worse riding in car. Flatulence, much flatus in abdomen.

Respiratory symptoms

Dry, painful cough with scanty, difficult expectoration and burning in pharynx.

Urinary symptoms

Polyuria with increased flow, some albumen and sugar. Urine smells of violets, burning along urethra, increase of uric acid. Enuresis in weakly children who are nervous and irritable.

Heart

Weak, frequent pulse, with inability to lie down. Tachycardia. Palpitation from least exertion. Ready excitability of heart. Severe heart pain.


Thyroidinum 623 SLA

Extremities
Rheumatic arthritis with tendency to obesity, coldness and cramps of extremities. Trembling of limbs and entire body. Oedema of legs. Peeling of skin of lower extremities.

Skin

Psoriasis associated with adiposity. Browny swelling. Skin dry, impoverished. Eczeme. Swelling of glands of stony hardness. Jaundice with itching. Ichthyosis, lupus Itch-ing without eruption, worse at night.

N.B. : Thyroidinum is contraindicated in tubercular patients for it may most likely bring about further reduction of weight.

chapter : 210  TRILLIUM PENDULUM

Wake Robin H. MINTON Smilaceac

INTRODUCTION

Another popular name for this plant is Beth—root, which sufficiently signifiesits reputation as a great haemostat.Though this remedy has not been provedthoroughly, there is hardly any doubt asto its capacity to control haemorrhage, beit from nose, kidney, uterus or any otherorgan.

CLINICAL

Bladder-Catarrh of. Climaxis. Fainting with flooding. Fibroma-haemorrhages from. Haemorrhages-post-partum, anti-partum. Menorrhagia. Metror-rhagia.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) In haemorrhage from nose, lungs, kidneys, uterus or any other organ where the character of blood is usually pro-fuse, bright red and flow may    be active or passive.

2) Menses : Every two weeks, lasting a week or longer and very profuse.

3) Flooding, with fainting ; faint, dim sight, palpitation, obstruction and noises in the ears.

4) Menorrhagia ; Flow profuse, gushing, bright red, at least movement (Sabina); from displaced uterus; at the climacteric; every two weeks ; dark    clotted (Thlas. Ust).

5) Incipient phthisis with bloody sputa ; in advanced stages with copious, purulent expectoration and troublesome cough.

6) Sensation as if hips & small of back were falling to pieces ; as if sacro-illiac synchondroses were falling apart, wants to be bound tightly ;    as if bone of pelviswere broken vith haemorrhage.

RELATIONS :

Complementary—to Calc Phos in menstrual and haemorrhagic affections.


chapter :211

TUBERCULINUM — BACILLINUM

Pus from Tubercular BURNETT A Nosode
abscess

INTRODUCTION

Tuberculinum is prepared from the pus of human pulmonary tubercle whereasBacillinum is prepared from the lungtissue in which tubercular bacilli aredetected microscopically. CLARKE makesno distinction between the two remedies.He says, ONE WILL ANSWER TO THEINDICATION OF THE OTHER ALLENdoes not apparently recognise anydifference between the two preparation inpotencies.

CLINICAL

Asthma, Bone caries of, Bronchitis, Boils, Catarrhal, Dentition, Diarrhoea, Erysipelas, Erythema, Headache, Heart affection, Influenza, Leucorrhoea, Meningitis,Menstrual disorders, Marasmus, Pleurisy, Meningitis tubercular, Phthisis, Pneumonia,Plica Polonica, Skin affection, Tuberculosis, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Tuberculinum acts on skin, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, especially, bronchi, lungs, pleurae lymph glands, particularly those of cervical group.

PATHOGENESIS

It affects the respiratory system manifesting as bronchitis, catarrhal pneumonia,tubercular pleurisy; the skin manifests itching eczema with scabies.

CONSTITUTION

Physical make-up: It is especailly adapted to the light complexioned, narrow-chest subjects with blue eyes, who are tall, slim and active, but rapidly emaciate especially children. Persons who are very precocious mentally but weak physically.

Temperament: Nervous persons with the tubercular soil.

Relation with heat and cold: Highly chilly patient takes cold easily on slight exposure
to cold air.


Miasm: Pseudopsora is in the background.

Diathesis: Tubercular and scrofulous diathesis.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Symptoms ever changing—are very striking. Symptoms change all the time affecting one organ after another, such as brain, lungs, liver, etc.    (Lac can.).Symptoms begin suddenly and cease suddenly.

2. The patient takes told easily without knowing how and from where. Seems to take cold “every time he takes a breath of fresh air”.

3. This remedy can be thougt of when there is a family history of tubercular affections or when the best selected remedy fails to relieve or         permanently improve, without reference to the name of the disease.

4. Emaciation rapid and pronounced. Losing flesh while living well (Abrot., Cale.Phos., Iodum, Silicea).

5. Sudden, early morning diarrhoea.

6. It is a good, remedy for bony suppurations especially in cases that have been resistant to other remedies.

7. Patient feels better in every way when in open air.

8. Chronic headache, when the best selected remedy only palliates. Also it is good for school girl’s headache even when suitable glasses fail to    relieve, but the paient must have a tubercular history.

9. Crops of small boils which are intensely painful, appear successively, especially in nose, containing green foetid pus (Secale cor.).

10. Mind : The patient is very much PRECOCIOUS mentally but physically weak. He is irritable and fretful, especailly when waking up. Depressed    and melancholic;despondent and morose. The drug also has contradictory mental symptoms such as mania and melancholia, insomnia and sopor. There is great fear of animals especially of DOGS. The patient has disposition and desire to use foul and filthy language to curse to swear. The patient is naturally of asweet disposition, but now turned peevish, taciturn andsulky—on the boderland of insanity. Everything in the room seems to be strange as though in a strange place, despite the fact that the place and room are very familiar.

11. Ailments from tubercular heritage.

PARTICULARS

Headache :

Causation: Tubercular history in family, chronic headache, when the best selected remedies only palliate.


Tuberculinum — Bacilliunum 627

Location: Headache is felt from right eye backwards to occiput.

Sensation: Sensation of an iron hoop around the head.

Character: Chronic tubercular headache. Pain is sharp, cutting and intense. School girl’s sick headache, with tubercular history.

Modality: Aggravation from eye strain, study, slight mental exertion, when using eyes in close work and when the glasses fail to give the expected benefit.

Meningtis :

Mode of onset: Meningitis of acute and sudden onset
.
Parts affected: Cerebrum and the base of brain.


Character: There is acute cerebral or basilar meningitis, with threatened effusion. Nocturnal hallucination wakes the patient from sleep; frightened at night cind starts screaming.

Tuberculinum is indicated when the best selected remedies like Apis. Helleborus or Sulphur fail to relieve.

Respiratory organs :

Tubercular deposits begin in apex of lungs, usually the left lung (Phos., Sulphur). There is cavity in lungs with sudden haemorrhage. Deposits of tubercle in pleura or tubercular pleurisy and abscess in lungs.

Cough : Hard, dry hacking cough, aggravation after sleep with profuse sweat and loss of weight.

Diarrhoea :

Time: Early in the morning.

Character: Sudden imperative discharge with great force. Stool is dark, brown, watery and very offensive.

Concomitants: Progressive emaciation while eating well. There is great weakness with profuse night sweat.

Menses :
Tardy first menses.
Time: Too early.
Quantity: Too profuse
Duration: Too long lasting.
Character: There is no particular character of blood.
Concomitants; Frightful dysmenorrhoea, tardy in starting. Pain increases with the establishment of flow. Tubercular history. Benign mammary tumours.

Skin : In Tuberculinum, skin shows the following symptoms:-

(1) Boils: Crops of small boils and acne, which are intensely painful; successively appear in nose, WITH GREEN FOEITID PUS (Secale cor.) in         patlents with tubercular history.

(2) Eczema: Eczema over the entire body, oozing type especially behind ears, within the hair, in folds of skin, etc. intense itching and bran-        like scales, with rawness and soreness, fiery red skin. Aggravation at night, when undressing and from bathing

(3) Hair : Plica polonica (a matted condition of the hair caused by filth and presence of parasites), In such complaint this remedy     has     parmanently cured several bad cases after Borax and Psorinum failed.

Baby :
Adapted to thin emaciated babies WITH TUBERCULAR HERITAGE.

Geneal Modalities :

Aggravation: Motion, music, before a strom, standing in dampness, from draught, early morning and
after sleep.

Amelioration: In open air.

Relations :

Complementary to: Psorinum, Sulphur.

Key-note remarks :

(1) Think of this great Nosode when the best selected remedies like Psorinim and Sulphur, fail to relieve or permanently improve.
(2) Belladonna is used for acute attacks, congestive or inflammatory, occurring ir“tubercular diseases.
(3) Hydrastis is used to fatten patients cured with Tuberculinum.


chapter: 212

URTICA URENS

Stinging-Nettle

BURNETT

Urticaceae

INTRODUCTION

Urtica Urens is a remedy of a very ancient lineage. We find this remedy mentioned in the writings of Diascorides,who extolled it very highly as a great cleansing agent. In our time Dr. Burnett has taken it up and given it a very extensive proving.

CLINICAL

Agalactia. Bee-stings. Burns. Fever. Gout. Gravel. Pruritus. Rheumatism. Uraemia. Urticaria. Spleen-affections of. Menorrhagia.

SPHERE OF ACTION

Skin and mucous membrane, mammae, genitourinary organs, spleen and joints.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) Urticaria— Burning stinging and violent itching of skin, Urticaria disappears while lying down and reappears while getting up. It may come       before rheumatism with fever. Burning in skin is aggravated after sleep.

2) Burns—It is used in “first degree of burns”—locally and internally. It should be thought of even prior to Cantharis.

3) Rheumatism and Gout : Rheumatism alternates with urticaria. Uric acid diathesis.

4) Symptoms return at the same time every year

5) Dr. Burnett used Urtica urens in acute gout associated with fever.

6) Ailments from : Burns. Beestings. Flows. Suppressed milk. Suppressed nettle rash. Ill effects of shell fish and nettle rash.

PARTICULARS

Female
Uterine haemorrhage. Acrid and excoriating leucorrhoca, Pruritus vulvae, with stinging, itching and oedema. Diminished secretion of milk. Arrests flow of milk after weaning. Excessive swelling of breasts.

Skin

Urticaria, burning heat, with formication, violent itching. Itching blotches. Urticaria nodosa. Consequences of suppressed nettlerash. Rheumatism alternates with nettle rash. Erythema with burning and stinging. Burns & scalds. Herpes labialis with sensation of heat & itching. In Uriticaria, Urtica Urens can be compared with the following drugs.

Rhus Tox : Urticaria with intense itching burning & stinging. Worse, Cold, wet rainy weather at night, from getting wet while perspiring. Better, warm dry weather, warm.

Apis Mel: Urticaria with intense bruning & stinging. Worse

Relations
Compare: For pain in heels : Agar, Causti, Cycl., Led., Mang. Phyto.

Antidote to : Merc, abuse of chamomilla, tea.

Antidoted by: Bell, Camph, Cinch., Coffea, Puls.


chapter :213 USTILAGO

Corn-smut BURT Fungi

INTRODUCTION

This remedy was proved by Dr. Hurt on himself and others. This is a fungus that grows on the Indian corn. The provings of this remedy
prought out specific affin-ity for the generative sphere of both sexes. The next important sphere of this remedy is on the skin, hair and nails.

PARTICULARS
Sexual Organs :

Male : Spermatorrhoea after onanism, emission every night, talking about women causes an emission. Seminal emission and irresistible desire to masturbation. There is constant aching distress in the testicles, more specially in the right. The pain is very severe & it shifts suddenly to the bowels, the pain is accompanied by nausea & cold sweat on the scrotum. Irritable weakness and relaxation of the male sexual organs with erotic fancies and seminal emissions.

Female : The most valuable symptoms of this fungus are to be found in its action on the female generative organs.
Menses : Onset too easily.
Quantity : Too scanty, or too profuse.

During menses : Pains from back to loins and womb. Crampy pain, great nervous restlessness,flatulency, nausea which is relieved by eating (Bovista., Lith Garb, Anacardium). Frequent, profuse urination.

Modalities :

Aggravation : from movement, before menses, in warm room, lying on affected side. (rev. of Puls.)

Amelioration : Lying down, in open air, (Puls.)

 Useful in false pains preceding labour and after pains if pain is crampy and spasmodic in character.

 Frequent and very early miscarriages causing sterility.

 Reflex symptoms from uterine affection.

Extremities : Stiff, sore feeling in nape of neck, Feels as if back would break. Sacral backache. Lower extremities weak & heavy.

Leucorrhoea :Thin yellow—white colourless, except with stool, when it is thick, white, blood Streaked. Excoriating.

chapter :214

VALERIANA

Valerian HAHNEMANN Valerianaceae

INTRODUCTION

This remedy first appeared in homoeopathic medicine in Stapf’s additions; the articles on it was written by Franz. Dr. Hahnemann and Stapf
were among the provers of this remedy.

CLINICAL

Earache. Painful heel. Hysteria. Neuralgia. Sci-atica. Sleeplessness. Vomiting.

SPHERES OF ACTION

This remedy affects mind, nerves esp. spinal and genito-urinary muScles, heels and tendoachilles.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) In nervous affections when apparently selected remedies fail (Ambra., Opium) (In G.L. tract affections—carbo Veg, In chest—Laurocerasus. In    fever cases—Pyrogen)
2) Suited to hysterical nervous tempe.'ament and persons in whom the intellectual faculties predominate.
3) Over sensitiveness of all the senses (Chamo., Nux.V.)
4) Red parts become white (Per. M.)
5) Sciatic pain worse, when standig and letting foot rest on floor, when straightening out limbs during rest from pre-vious exertion. Better when    walking.
6) Child vomits curdled milk in large lumps after nursing, esp. after mother has been angry.
7) Feels light as if floating in air (Asar., Lac. C.; as if legs were floating—Sticta.)
8) Sensation as if a thread is hanging down the throat, (on tongue—Nat. M., Silica).
9) Earache from exposure to draughts and cold. Nervous noises, Hyperasthesisa.
10) Diarrhoea ; Thin, watery stool with lumps of Coagulated milk and with violent screaming in children.
11) Pain in heel while sitting.
12) Ailments from : Injuries.
13) Mind : Mentally Valeriana patient is very intellectual. She is hysterical, overexcitable with changeable dispos-ition. She is irritable restless and cannot keep still for long. She posseses erroneous ideas, e.g., thinks she is someone else; as if all around were strange and disagree-able. She is confronted with plentiful hallucinations and delusions. She frequently feels to see images of animals, men, etc. Moreover many peculiar sensations crowd and jostle in her mind such as she is floatig in air, severe cold has accumulated on her head, a thread is hanging down the throat, etc.

GENERAL MODALITIES

Aggravation : Noon, before midnight, while standing, when sitting.

Amelioration : From walking. heat in any form after sleep. Better by uncovering, cold bathing & in open air.

Dulcamara :

Urticaria over whole body, no fever; itching burns after scratching.

Aggravated by warmth & better by cold.

Nat. Mur : Urticaria, acute or chronic; over wholebody; espe-cially after violent exercise.

Antipyrine : Urticaria appearing and disappearing suddenly with internal coldness.

GENERAL MODALITIES :

Aggravation : Cool moist air, cold bathing, by touch, yearly.


chapter: 215 VARIOLINUM

Pus from small pox pustules A Nosode

INTRODUCTION

Variolinum is a drug belonging to the nosode family. The pus from the smallpox pustules is taken and potentised. It has only fragmentary and partial provings and as such full therapeutic uses are not known.

CLINICAL

Chicken pox, Herpes Zoster, Smallpox, - prevention of.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

.Generally Variolinum is used as a preventive medicine for smallpox. It bears the same relation to smallpox that antitoxin does to diptheria.

.As far as the curative value of this drug is concerned, it can be given in all cases of variola—whether single, confluent, haemorrhagic or     malignant and in varioloid and vericella, if and when they appear even after vaccination is given.But as a preventive against smallpox as well as a protection against it, this remedy is far superior to crude vaccination and is absolutely safe and free from any sequelae especially of septic and tubercular infection.

. It protects from, modifies and cures smallpox.

. It is also most efficacious, infallible and suitable in smallpox both for curative and preventive purposes in any potency—low or high.

chapter : 216 VERATRUM ALBUM

White Hellebore HAHNEMANN Melanthaceale

INTRODUCTION

White Hellebore, as it is commonly called, was known for centuries as one of the great remedies for collaspe and pain. Hahnemann’s provings established this fact by testing its reaction on the healthy provers. He tells.us in his Materia Medica  Pura some revealing things about this drug, particularly about its mental sphere which are as follows - “Physicians have no notion of the power possessed by this drug to promote a cure of almost one-third of the insane in lunatic asylums because they know not the pecular kind of insanity in which to employ it, nor the dose in which it should be administered in order to be efficacious and yet not injurious.

CLINICAL

Angina pectoris, Apoplexy, Asthma, Cholera, Colic, Collaspe, Constipation, Cramps, Debility, Diarrhoea, Epilepsy, Gastric and abdominal disorders, Headache, Influenza, Intermittent fever, Labour, Mania, Melancholia, Meningitis, Menstrual disorders, Rheumatism, Vertigo, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Veratrum album acts especially upon the system of nutrition affecting profoundly the vegetative sphere. It also acts upon the blood and nervous system.

PATHOGENESIS

It causes disorganisation of blood and seperates it into its constitutent components. The circulation becomes embarassed and as a result, there is general torpor of the vegetative system. It gives rise to choleric condition, general coldness, prostration, collaspe, copious watery vomiting and purging, spasmodic colic, cramps and spasms. Its action on the nervous system results in excitation of the cerebral nerves producing
thereby delirum and mania, in addition to great exhaustion of nerve power.

CONSTITUTION

As it is mainly an acute remedy, no importane is to be attached to be physical make-up or constitution as such of the patient. But it is especially suited to the complaints of People too young and too old (i.e. extremes of age)

Temperament: Nervous and sanguine temperament.

Relation with heat and cold: Chilly patient.

Miasm: Psora is in the background.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1.“Profuseness” of all discharges is the key-note symptom of this drug. This criterion runs through the whole remedy, e.g., in diarrhoea,    vomiting, sweat, etc.
2. Rapid sinking of the Vital Force; complete prostration and collapsed condition.
3. Craving for acids, refreshing things, fruits, cold food, water and juicy things (Phos.). Aversion to warm things.
4. Cold perspiration all over the body especially on the forehead; with nearly all complaints.
5. Violent vomiting with profuse diarrhoea.
6. Bad effects of fright, opium taking, tobacco chewing, etc.
7. Intense unquenchable thirst for large quantities of cold water; wants everything cold. N.B. Profuse cold perspiration on forehead, extreme coldness, blueness and weakness are manifested by this drug with nearly all complaints.

8. Mind : The mental symptoms of Veratrum album are much more important for arriving at a proper selection of the remedy than its other symptoms.

It has got all THREE TYPES OF MANIA i.e., the violent mania of Belladonna, the religious mania of Stramonium and the lascivious mania of Hyoscyamus and each one of them tries to supersede the other.

Sometimes the patient becomes VIOLENT AND DESTRUCTIVE. He wants to destroy, to tear something, he tears the clothes, due to violent cerebral congestion. There is bloated face and a disposition to bite and tear. This is only one phase of the mania.

In the other phase of the mania the patient becomes very much lascivious. Sings obscene songs, thinks lewd thoughts, exhibits immodesty; the patient does not want to cover his privateparts, kicks off the clothes and lies naked on the bed and exposes
the person. There is maniacal desire to kiss everyboy—NYMPHOMANIA AND SATYRIASIS.

In the third phase there is the RELIGIOUS MANIA. The patient talks all the time about God. There is a state of religious frenzy. He is praying and beseeching all the time without respite.

Whenever we find all these three types of mania in a patient and when all these mainas compete to supersede one another, Veratrum album is the
only remedy to be thought of and administered.



There is yet another state of mind also found in Veratrum album i.e., a state of brooding, full of despair and hopelessness. The patient is melancholic, sits and broods in silence.

The patient does not want to be alone, yet persistently refuses to talk. Sensation of a lump of ice on the vertex.
Thinks that she is pregnant and will soon be delivered. Cholera like symptoms after fright is also covered by this drug.

Ailments from : Fright, shock, injury, disappointed love, suppressed exanthema,opium, tobacco, alcohol and fruits.

PARTICULARS

Gastro-intestinal symptoms :

The usual complaints met with in this drug, relating to the gastrointestinal tract, are VIOLENT DIARRHOEA AND VOMITING OR CONSTIPATION. Violence in everything is the striking peculiarity of this remedy.

Stomach : There is cold feeling injthe stomach with cutting pain as if from knives. There is also sinking feeling in the stomach. Nausea and vomiting just after eating and drinking, are frequently found The patient craves acid and refreshing juicy things.

There is great thirst for huge.quanitity of icy cold-water.
Constipation :
Sensation: Desire is felt in epigastrium (Ign.—In rectum Nux vom.).

Character of stool: Dry, hard, in round black balls, very much gainful with much straining untilthe patient is exhausted.

Diarrhoea :

* Causation: From fright, eating, drinking and taking fruits.

* Sensation: Cutting pain in abdomen as from knives.

© Character of stool: Stool is PROFUSE, watery, gushing and mixed with flakes.


© During stools: There is colic with cramps commencing in hands and feet spreading all over the body, with COLD SWEAT ON FOREHEAD.

¢ After stool: There is great prostration.

© Modality: Aggravation from fright, least motion, eating and drinking.

© Concomitants: Diarrhoea before and during menses (Bov., Ammon. Carb.).

Cholera :

© Causation: From fright or taking impure drinks.

¢ During cholera: There is PROFUSENESS OF DISCHARGES which runs through the whole temedy e.g. PROFUSE PURGING, VOMITING, SWEAT, ete.
Violent vomiting with profuse diarrhoea, excessive vomiting and purging. There is profuse, rice-watery stool which gushes out.
cramps: With cholera there are cramps which commence in hands and feet and spread all over the body.

© Look of the face : The face becomes BLUE, PALE, FEATURES SUNKEN, EYES, SUNKEN, CHEEKS ARE SUNKEN, MALAR BONES are prominent, blue ring around the eyes. “HIPPOCRATICFACF.” is typical in Veratrum album, with cold sweat on forehead.

* Collapse: Due to profuse diarrhoea and vomiting, there is collapsed condition. The body is cold to touch with corresponding blueness, fairly purple lips blue and cold. Sensation of a lump of ice on vertex, extremities are cold as if dead; patient looks AS IF DYING WITH RAPID SINKING OF THE VITAL FORCE.

© Sweat: During cholera, the sweat is well marked. COLD AND CLAMMY SWEAT ALL OVER THE BODY, ESPECIALLY UPON FOREHEAD.

© Desire: During cholera there is intense desire for large quantity of very cold water, refreshing things and acids.

e After cholera: complete prostration and excessive weakness.

© Modality: Aggravation after eating and drinking and by least motion.

© Concomitants: Before and during menses, there is cholera like symptoms (Ammon. carb.

In short—extreme coldness, blueness, weakness arid excessiveness of all the discharges, make one to think of Veratrum album, in cholera.

Veratum album differs from CAMPHOR in cholera. There is “DRY CHOLERA” with coldness, blueness, scanty sweat, vomiting and purging in Camphor. In camphor, the patient sinks down and dies without exhaustive discharges. Scanty discharges with coldness, blueness and collaspe indicate Camphor, whereas as a contrast, COPIOUS, PROFUSENESS, BLUENESS AND COLDNESS ARE PRSENT IN VERATRUM ALBUM.Thus Veratrum album and Camphor can be easily differentiated.
Menses :

Veratum is a good drug for menstrual toubles, if the following symptoms are present :-

Time: Too early.
Quantity: Too profuse.
Character: Very much exhausting, makes the patient so weak, that she can scarcely stand for two days at each menstrual nisus.
Pain: Dysmenorrhoea, with cutting pain in abdomen. Faints from least exertion.

With menses, there is COLD SWEAT ON FOREHEAD WITH COLLAPSED CONDITION AND GREAT WEAKNESS,Concomitants; Cholera like symptoms before and during menses.

Rheumatism :

Causation: From warmth of bed and during wet weather.

Character: Neuralgia-like pain in the extremities. Severe pain makes the patient jump up from the bed, especially at night, pains like electric flashes.

Modalities: Aggravation from warmth of bed and during wet weather.

Amelioration: By continued motion (Rhus tox.) but continued motionproduces heat and this heat causes further aggravation.


Veratrum Album 

Intermittent fever :

In Veratum album we got a very congestive and pernicious type of intermittent fever, with extreme coldness of the body, great thirst, face cold and collapsed, skin cold and clammy, great prostration, cold sweat on forehead and deadly pallor on face.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: From least motion, after drinking, before and during stool, when perspiring and after fright.

Amelioration : When walking and by warmth.

Relations :

After camphor in cholera.
After Ammon carb, and Bovista in dysmenorrhoea.

chapter :217 VERATRUM VIRIDE

Green Hellebore BURT Melanthaceae

INTRODUCTION

Veratrum viride is a small but powerful drug. It is mostly used in severe acute cases, such as severe form of headache, sunstroke, basilar
meningitis, convulsion, acute rheumatism, etc. It has direct action over heart, causing depression
of heartbeat and low pulse rate. So never misuse it and never repeat it very frequently just to
control the heart’s action or bring down thepulse. Like any other remedy it can only be given for the totality of symptoms.
Hale was chifly instrumental in introducing Veratrum viride into Homoeopathy, using it particularly in pneumonia.

Belladonna has got muchsimilarity with Veratrum viride. So, never substitute it when Veratrum viride is indicated. Individual and comparative study of these two drugs are necessary for a correct prescription.

CLINICAL
Apoplexy, Asthma, Brain affection, Chorea, Convulsion, Erysipelas, Headache, Heart affection, Hyperpyrexia, Fever, Meningitis, Pneumonia, Rheumatism, Sunstroke, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Veraturm viride acts on heart, blood vessels, pneumo-gastric nerve, lungs and joints. It particularly acts on the cervical portion of spinal cord and the base of the brain.

PATHOGENESIS

Acting on the heart, it lowers both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. It also on the internal organs such as the base of brain, chest, spine, stomach, etc. and produces congestion.

CONSTITUTION

Since Veratrum viride is mostly an acute drug, consideration of constitution is not of much importance. The patient is however, full blooded, plethoric, with bloated and livid face.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. A narrow, well developed red streak right through the middle of the toungue, is the red-strand symptom of this drug.
2. Sudden onset of all the troubles as in Aconite and Belladonna, is a great indicator of Veratrum viride.
3. Congestion is yet another leading keynote of Veraturm viride, especially congestion in the base of brain, spine, lung and stomach.
4. Sensation of fulness in the head causing a heavy headache.
5.Pulse Suddenly increases and gradually decreases below normal; slow, soft, weak, irregular and intermittent pulse (Digitalis); low tension.
6. Beating of pulse throughout the body, especially in the right thigh.
7. Everything tastes sweet.
8. Ailments from : Going into sun’s rays, going from hot to-cold, after suppression of menses and lochia.

PARTICULARS

Meningitis :
Causation: Meningitis may be caused by exposure to heat.

Onset: Sudden and violent.

Character: Basiter meningitis; convulsion, dim vision, RETRACTED, PUPILS DILATED, tetanic

convulsion, cold and clammy perspiration. Pain in the nape of neck, cannot hold the head up; opisthotonos.

Modalities:
 Aggravation: By motion, raising the head, exposure to heat and cold and sitting erect.

 Amelioration: By remaining quiet, lying down and rubbing.

Apoplexy :

Congestive apoplexy, head hot; blood-shot eyes, thick speech, pulse full and hard as iron. Bloated livid face. Hippocratic face, with red streak down the middle of the tongue.

Sunstroke :
Face is flushed; head full; throbbing of arteries, bearing of pulse throughout the body; vertigo with nausea. Convulsive twitching of the faeial muscles. Sensitive to sound; double vision or partial vision (Glon., Gels).

Headache :

Causation: Exposure to sun’s rays, heat and extreme cold, suppression of menses and lochia.

Onset; Sudden and violent Onset.

Character: Violent nerypus sick headache: Congestion from suppressed menses. Intense, almost
apopletic headache; throbbini of arteries; head hot and face flushed


Modalities:

Aggravation: By motion, raising the head, warmth.

Amelioration: By remaining quiet, lying down and tigh  bandaging.

Concomitants:; Nausea and vomiting, with blood-shot eyes.

Blood pressure :

Veratrum viride is a very good medicine for high blood pressure whenever symptoms correspond i.e.its peculiar pulse, characteristic tongue and face, throbbibng of carotids, BLOOD SHOT EYES AND HEAD, etc. point to this drug.

Tongue :

The key-note of Veratrum viride is its peculiar and most characteristic tongue. The tongue is white or yellow, but with RED STREAK DOWN THE MIDDLE. Tongue may be, dry, moist, with white or yellow coating or no coating on either side, feels scalded (Sanguinaria) with increased saliva.

Pneumonia :

Causation: Exposure to cold or heat and sun’s rays.

Mode of Onset: Sudden and violent onset

Stage: Veratrum viride is indicated in the congestive stage or early stage and hepatisation stage of pneumnonia.

Character: There is difficult breathing. Sensation of a heavy load on chest, Paint feeling in STOMACH.

High fever with full hard pulse. Severe occipital headache. Livid or flushed face, cold, and clammy perspiration. White or yellow tongue with red streak down the middle. Everything tastes sweet.
Modalities:

* Aggravation: By motion and being uncovered.

¢ Amelioration: By keeping quiet and lying down.

N.B. Veratrum viride will raise the opsonic index against the, Diplococcus pneumonae from 70 to 109 per cent.

Rheumatism :

Acute rheumatism with high fever; foil hartdand rapid pulse. Severe pain in joints and muscles with scanty red urine.

Fever :

Veratrum viride may be frequently required for purerperal fever or milk fever or enteric fever or pneumonia or suppurative fevers, or any other condition where the following symptoms are present:-

Causation: Fever may come due to exposure to cold or sun’s rays or extreme heat, or even after suppression of lochia.
Mode of onset; The onset is very sudden and violent.

Character: There is unusually high rise of temperature, i.e, hyperthermia in the evening and hypothermia in the morning.

Chill is more prominent: Patient feels cold, extremely cold with clammy perspiration. Face is flaccid with congestive headache during heat stage. There may also be great weakness. Pulse is full and hard. The tongue may be coated white or yellow, but alwavs with a red streak down the middle.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: By motion, rising from bed, going from a hot to a cold place, sifting erect, being uncovered and in winter.

Amelirration: By keeping head perfectly still, lying down, rubbing and massaging. 


chapter: 218

Cramp Bark H.C. ALLEN Caprifoliaceae

INTRODUCTION

This plant is a native of Great Britain. It pears red berries which are sour and are utilised in making jelly. One learns most about this medicine from Male’s Materia Medica of the New Remedies. It is a great remedy for women’s complaints.

CLINICAL

After-pains, Cramps. Dysmenorrhoea- spasmodic, membranous, neuralgic. Labour pains,— false. Miscarriage.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Viburnum acts especially upon the female genital organs uterus, ovaries and other genital organs. Left side is more affected than the right.

CONSTITUTION

Suited to tall, slender, dark or fair haired hys-terical subjects.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) This remedy is valuable in spasmodic and membranous dysmemorrhoea with following indications Menses Time too late Duration Lasting a few hours. Quantity Scanty

Character of blood Thin light coloured and offensive in odour. Before menses Severe bearing down pains, pain in anterior muscles of thigh. Heavy aching feeling in sacral and pubic regions.

Character of blood : Blood clotted, bright red. There is also oozing of dark blood, highly coagulated, forming occasion-ally long, black, stringy clots. Flow profuse and did Not cease entirely until next period. Vicarious menstruation from lungs and bowels. Menor-rhagia at climaxis; active & constant flowing with frequent clots.



Metrorrhagia : after miscarriage, confinement or at the climaxis. Profuse menses after miscarriage; discharge of blood from slightest provocation.

Uterus hypertrophied; prolapsed.Cervix sensitive, spongy, bleed easily. Passive haemorrhage from retention of secundines after miscarriage. Blood is darkish & coagulated. The uterus is enlarged & cervix tumified with constant bearingdown pain. Flow is intermittent. Agalactia. Ch.inflammations.

Skin

Alopceia. Complete loss of hair. Tendency to small boils. Painful, destructive disease of nails. Skin dry & hot; congested. Pricking, burning, itching a marked erythema of theskin of the uncovered parts of the body, followed by a parchment like, dark brown skinwith rhagades worse < by warmth copper—coloured spots on skin.

chapter:219 VINCA MINOR

Lesser Periwinkle ROSENBURG Apocynaceae

INTRODUCTION

This remedy was proved by Rosenburg on four healthy persons who took thetincture in 20—60 drops doses. The mostimportant field of its action is located onskin, hair & female genital organs. It hasbeen successfully used in eczema, plicapolonica, alopecia & crusta lactea and to
con-trol the uterine haemorrhages.On the head, there is numerous humideruptions which itch burn intensely; fromthese a moisture oozes that mats the hairstogether. Corrosive itching of scalp with irrestible desire to scratch. The skin of the bodyis highly sensitive with redness and soreness from slight rubbing Another use of this remedy is to control uterine haemor-rhage. There is excessive menstruation with great weakness. It also controls haemorrhages either from fibroids or climaxis Haemorrhages are usually passive in character.



chapter : 220 VIPERA

German Viper Ophidia

INTRODUCTION

Vipera affects the blood and blood vessels, leading to haemorrhages &inflammation of the vessels themselves.Viper poisoning causes a temporaryparaplegia of the. lower extremitiesextending upwards. It is indicated inphlebitis, lymphangioma, varicose veins,enlargement of liver, polyneuritis &polio—myelitis etc.

The characteristic indication of this remedy is varicose veins & acute phlebitis is “bursting sensation in affected limbs & unbearable pain when limbs areallowed to hang down”. Patient is obliged to keep the extemities elevated. Veins are swollen, sensitive & painful with bursting sensation. The next important use of this remedy is in enlargement of liver when there is violent pain in the enlarged liver in jaundice & fever. Pain radiates to shoulder & hip.



chapter : 221

XANTHOXYLUM

Prickly Ash Rutaceae

INTRODUCTION :

Just like Sepia, this remedy is particularly a woman’s remedy, specially for the nervous women.

CLINICAL
After pains. Headache. Hemiplegia. Indigestion.Neuralgia-crural. Neuralgic dysmenorrhoea.

Sciatica. Toothache. Uterine fibroma.

SPHERE OF ACTION AND PATHOGENESIS

Its specific action is on nervous system and mucous membrane, causing excessive mucoussecretion of the mouth by stimulating secretionfrom all glands with ducts opening in the mouth. & female genital system.

CONSTITUTION

Best adapted to persons who are thin, emaciated and nervous with nervous temperament having Psoric and Syphilitic miasm’s in the back ground.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1) This remedy is infallible for neuralgic dysmenorrhoea in women of nervous, delicate nature—who give history of too early, usually thick blackish stringy-blood,menstrual flow intermitting every other day and generally lasting for 2 weeks. Themost important is the agonizing pain along the course of the genito crural nerve.The pain shoots down as low as knnd no position really relieves. Generallyassociated with backache and headache. During pain patient desires to take deepbreath. Dysmenorrhoea may be attended with left sided ovarian neuralgia. (LilTig, Lachesis, Medo, Thuja)

2) Leucorrhoea in place of menses (Cocculus., lodum., Nux-Mos., Phos.)

3) Headache : Specially when caused by suppression of menses. During headache there is sensation as if head were surrounded by tight band   (Gels-., Nitric Acid.,Carbo. Acid., Sulph,) Head feels full. Occipital headache. Usu-ally headache isassociated with sleepiness, flatulence,       ringing in ears.

Modalities : Aggravation—In the morning.

Amelioration : By cold water, in open air.

4) Nervous symptoms—Paralysis especially left sided hemiplegia. Numbness of left.side.Neuralgic shooting pain as from electricity all over limbs.     Sciatica worse in hotweather.

5) Ailments from : Injury to nerve, getting wet, suppression of menses, over-eating,neurasthania.
 

chapter : 222 

X-RAY

(Vial containing alcohol exposed to X-Ray)

DR. BERNHARDT FINCKE IN 1897

INTRODUCTION

It is one of the most neglected drugs of Materia Medica. No, doubt it was proved longago, moite than ninety years back but it is rarelyused by us, Homoeopaths. If we analyse thesymptoms of potentised X-Ray, we can easilyknow the depth and wide, range of action of thismedicine. In various kinds of complicatedmiasmatic diseases, sycotic, syphylitic, psoriceven mixed miasmatic diseases, if we use thismedicine at proper time, we may help in curingvarious kinds of clinical dreaded conditions suchas obstinate eczema, psoriasis, vitelego, alopecia,corn, various kinds of warts, neurofibroma, various kinds of ulcers, and wounds whichrefuse to heal, fistula, caries and necrosis of bones, obstinate cases of rheumatism,arthritis and gouts, paresis and paralysis, retarded growth, diabetis melitus, andanaemia. Its homoeopathic action is centrifugal towards the periphery. It is a very deepacting, long lasting medicine and should not be repeated off and on.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS :

1) History of repeated exposure to X-Ray, either for diagnostic or therapeutic purpose and/or history of Radium Therapy. There may be or may not    be such history. Ifsymptoms agree, X-Ray should be thought of.

2) When well indicated medicines fail to relieve or cure the mixed miasmatic conditions, it should be thought of.

3) Long lasting suppression of miasmatic conditions—it brings out to the surface suppressed symptoms such as gonorrheal discharge, syphilitic chancers, skin eruptions etc.

4) It covers mixed miasmatic states such as psora, sychosis & syphilis, when the constitutional medicines are not indicated or are failing to do    much good to thepatient.

5) If there is much organic changes leading to a stage of incurability, then in suchcases when individualistic symptoms are very few and more    disease symptomsappear, X-Ray may turn the case into curable state.

6) When symptoms are taking wrong directions. In a case, if mental symptoms improve leaving abnormality on physical plane or viceversa.

7) Non healing ulcers, fistulae, wounds, burns, sinuses etc.

8) Falling of hair in bunches or total alopecia.

9) Corns, ganglia, excrescenses, and also new growths of any kind.

10) Retardation of growth both physical and mental.

11) Rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, spondylosis, Pott’s disease.

12) Congenital or acquired deafness and dumbness.

18) X-Ray should be thought of in case of oligospermia, with or without loss of sexual desire.

14) Desire for sweets, aversion to meat, complete loss of appetite.

15) Long lasting physical and mental debility which may not be associated with any other marked sufferings.

16) Sleep : There may be sleeplessness or cat nap sleep from no apparent cause.

17) Mental : Patient is mentally irritable. He desires to be alone. Mental condition
    upset during profuse menstrua-tion.

18) Causation—History of repeated exposure to X-Ray, may have personal or hereditary back ground. Suppressed skin eruptions, gonorrhoea,     syphilitic ulcer, injury, burn.

19) General modalities : Aggravation—at night, evening and afternoon, in bed, open air.

RELATION :

It antidotes Nux Vomica, Sulphur and the dynamic potencies of the remedy.

chapter: 223 

ZINCUM METALLICUM

Zinc The Element

INTRODUCTION

Last but not the least, here comes Zincum metallicum which is a great remedy for theaffection of nerves. Burt says, “WHAT IRON ISTO BLOOD, ZINC IS TO NERVE”. All the metalsand minerals are of great therapeutic value tohuman beings, although all of them have not yetbeen proved. Amongst these, Zinc is one havinggreat curative power which has been already established. This is one of the remedies quiteoften looked for by a true Homoeopath.

CLINICAL

Abdominal and gastric disorders, Alcoholism, Asthma, Brain-fag, Brain affection, Chilblains .Convulsion, Constipation, Dentition, Diarrhoea, Debility, Eye affection Eruptionssuppressed, Fidgety, Gastralgia, Headache, Memory weak, Meningitis, Neuralgia,Urinary affection, etc.

SPHERES OF ACTION

Zincum met., finds its main seat of action on cerebro-spinal system, blood, digestive system and kidneys.

PATHOGENESIS

Zincum met., acts on the cerebro-spinal nervous system producing a picture of cerebral depression. “FAG”, brain-fag and nerve-fag; a condition of erythism in brain,medulla oblongata arid spinal cord. Its action on blood causes anaemia and lessens thenumber of RBC. Acting on the digestive system, it sets in an abnormal appetite withconstipation or diarrhoea. Under its influence, kidneys exhibit congestion and defectiveabsorption of threshold substances.

GUIDING SYMPTOMS

1. Cerebral depression; nervous exhaustion and defecting, vitality run through the whole drug.

2. Brain and nerve power wanting. The patient is too WEAK to develop exanthemata, to expectorate, to urinate, to understand, to, memorise, to  
   menstruate, and the like.
3. There is INCESSANT AND VIOLENT FIDGETY FEELING IN FEET AND LOWER EXTREMITIES; MUST MOVE THEM CONSTANTLY.

4. Always feels better in every way as soon as the MENSES APPEAR; it relieves all sufferings (Lach.—rev. of Actaea racemosa).

5. Relief from all natural discharges, i.e., of back by seminal emission; general amelioration by menstrual flow.There is general twitching,   jerking and trembling all over the body. The patient cannot bear any covering during sweat stage.There is marked anaemia present.Convulsion,    chorea, paralysis and vertigo from suppressed eruption and from fright.

6. Hasty eating and drinking is very characteristic

7. There is great intolerance of wine, even a small quantity aggravates all the troubles
.

8. Sudden spasmodic bursting sensation about the heart; seems as if it would burst through the chest.

9. There is INSATIABLE HUNGER AT 11 A.M/12 NOON.

10. Desire for food at lla.m., or 12 noon. Aversion to wine, meat and sweets.

11. Ailments from Defective vitality; under developed or suppressed exanthemata and skin eruptions, suppressed foot sweat and wine of even a small quantity.

PARTICULARS

Head:

Vertigo; falling to the left when walking. Sensation of eyes drawing together, followed by nausea, vomiting and trembling. Heaviness and dullness in head; hemicrania. Automatic motion of head andhands. Forehead is cool and base of brain hot.

Headache from wine or alcohol, after taking even a small quantity. In hydrocephalus and meningitis, the patient rolls the head from side to side. Bores the head into the pillow. Impending paralysis of brain.There are symptoms of effusion into ventricles.

Extremities :

Due to defective vitality and lack of brain and nerve power, there is INCESSANT AND VIOLENT FIDGETY FEELING AND WEAKNESS IN THE FEET AND, THEREFORE, THE PATIENT WANTS TO.KEEP ‘THEM MOVING CONSTANTLY.There is also excessive nervous movement of feet in bed for hours after retiring, even when asleep. Feet are sweaty and sore about the toes; foetid and suppressed foot sweat. There is great weakness andtrembling of extremities. During sweat, the patient cannot tolerate covering. Sweat relieves. There isgeneral amelioration by menstrual flow.

Convulsion :

Causation: Cerebral affection; paralysis of brain, effusion into ventricles, during dentition period in children, from suppression of eruption and fright.

The patient cries out during sleep; whole body jerks while sleeping. The patient wakes up frightened; rolls the head from side to side; bores the head into the pillow; face alternately pale and red; PALE FACE,

no HEAT, except perhaps at the occiput; rolling the eyes and gnashing the teeth. There is automatic motion of the hands and head or one hand, and head. Incipient brain diseases in children.

Trembling and jerking of single muscles (Aconite, Agaricus, Cicuta).

Hunger : There is ravenous hunger at about 11 a.m. to 12 noon. Great greediness when eating. Cannot eat fast enough.

Chilblains : Chilblains are painful and aggravated by rubbing.

Urine :
Can only void urine while sitting bent backwards.

General Modalities :

Aggravation: All symptoms are aggravated by drinking wine, taking even a small quantity of alcohol.

Amelioration: There is general relief of symptoms by menstrual flow; chest symptoms are relieved by expectoration; relief of bladder by urinating; of back by, seminal emission.

Relations :

Followed well: By Ignatia.

Inimical to: Chamomilla and Nux which should not be used before or after.

Compare with: Helleborus and Tubercutinum, in incipient brain diseases from eruptions.

INTRODUCTION

The relief of human suffering is a noble cause. Those who devote their life in this cause truly deserves the gratitude of their fellows. In the history of the healing art, onesuch name is Wilhelm Heinrich Schuessler, one of the outstanding intellects of theninentinth century and a man whose scientific vision was far ahead of his time. Dr.Schuessler was not only a doctor of medicine, but he was also a physiological chemist anda physicist. His keen, analytical mind was able to assimilate and to co-ordinate the far-reaching physiological discoveries of great contemporary scientists. As a practisingphysician, he was able to put his carefully worked-out theories to the test and thebrilliant results he achieved led to the formulation of his unique system of cellulartherapeutics, to which he gave the name - Biochemistry/Biochemic System of Medicne.Thus Dr. Wilhelm Heinrich Schuessler is considered as the founder of the BiochemicSystem of Medicine.

DR. WILHELM HEINRICH SCHUESSLER

Dr. Wilhelm Heinrich Schuessler was born on the 21st of August 1821 in Oldenburg, Germany. Sincechildhood, Schuessler was a studious boy and hadremarkable capabilities. He devoted most of his timelearning foreign languages like Latin, Greek, Spanish,French, English and Italian. He wanted to become aHomeopathic physician when he grew up, but his brothertold him that he would assist him to become one, only ifhe became a legally qualified practitioner. Keeping to hisword, Schuessler studied medicine at the University ofBerlin, Paris, Geissen and Prague. He then qualified as a

homeopathic practitioner and started his practice at
: 21st August, 1821 Oldenburg.

30th March, 1898 Dr. Schuessler was very much influenced by Rudolph Virchow (the founder of cellular pathology), who taught that all diseases are based on a change in the function ofcells in the body. Another important person who influenced him greatly was ProfessorMoleschott, who pointed out that the structure and vitality of the organs depends uponthe presence of inorganic constituents. Based on the theories of these two, Schuesslerformulated his own doctrine, which he called the Cell salt therapy or the Biochemicsystem of medicine. He is also referred as the Father of deficiency therapy. Dr Schuessler believed that when a human being is reduced to ashes by heat, thereare only twelve minerals left, These he called as the tissue salts. They are responsiblefor the natural balance and vitality of the body. According to him, deficiency of any ofthese tissue salts produces a diseased condition in the human organism, andreplenishment or supplementation of the body by the deficient salt, in physiological dosesrestores health in the organism. Schuessler potentised these tissue salts and made theminto biochemic remedies,

Schuessler wrote a lot of books during his time. In 1878, he published his first article on his healing system in the General homeopathic Journal, and titled it ‘An AbridgedTherapy based on physiology and cellular pathology’.

He had lot of ardent followers like Elizabeth Hubbard, Dr Stephenson, Dr. MBlackmore and others. In 1958, Dr Blackmore popularized Schuessler’s works in his book- ‘Colloids- A textbook for physicians’ He also refined Schuessler’s salts by addingmore tissue salts besides the existing twelve (except for sodium chloride).

The most interesting account of the application of Schuesslers’ remedies is to befound in the book titled “Nature’s 12 Magic Healers: The Amazing Secrets of Cell Salts”by Lionel Rolfe and Nigey Lennon. This book contains comments on the value of thesesalts by two eminent homeopathic physicians, Dr. J. H. Renner MD and Dr. William E.S. Jackson MD. Schuessler died in the year 1898, but his works have remained immortal.

HISTORY OF THE TISSUE REMEDIES

Samuel Hahnemann was the first to establish the great importance of the inorganic cell salts as medicines of a high order thorough investigation into their pathogeneticeffects and therapeutic uses. It was his provings of Lime, Salt, Potash and Silicia thatshowed what vast store-houses of medicinal force these inorganic substances are,although wholly inert in their crude state. This prepared the way for the development ofthe rest of the Tissue Remedies. He was the first who pointed out how these forces couldbe unlocked and directed for therapeutic purposes.

Later, in 1832, attention was called in a paper published in Stapfs Archiv to the great importance as remedies of all the “ essential component parts of the human body,” and again, in the same Journal, in 1846; “All constituents of the human body principally act on those organs wherein they have a function. All fulfill their functions when they are the cause of symptoms.” This comes from the pen of that remarkable genius in the field of Materia Medica — Constantine Hering.

Later on, Grauvogl, in his Text-Book, taking some notice of these remarks, amplified them. But it remained for Dr. Schiissler, of Oldenburg, Germany, to develop these suggestions and make the idea foreshadowed in them the basis of a “new system.” In March, 1873, an article, entitled “ Abridged Homoeopathic Therapeutics” from his pen, was published in a Gennan Homceopathic journal, in which he says : “About a year ago I
endeavored to discover by experiments on the sick if it were not possible to heal them, provided their diseases were curable at all, with those substances that are the natural, ie., the physiological function-remedies,” Of this no special notice seems to have been
taken, until, five months subsequently, Dr. Lorbacher, of Leipzig, came out in the same journal with some critical considerations of it. This was followed by a reply from Schussler, which ran through seven numbers, giving a more detailed account of this
“Abridged System of Homoeopathic Therapeutics,” the important features of which are incorporated in this work.

The original communication from Schussler to the German journal was translated into English, and published first in the Medical Investigator, May, 1873, and soon afterwards in a small work, by Dr. C. Hering, entitled the “ Twelve Tissue Remedies,”


Biochemic System of Medicine 659
“recommended for investigation” by this great teacher of our school. Several editions were published in rapid succession, from which this historical sketch is mainly derived, and following these appeared the translation of the twelfth German edition, by J. T. o’Connor, M. D,, and one by M. Docetti Walker, considerably enlarged by the addition of an appendix popularizing the Biochemic Method. Dr. Schussler, previous io his death, which occurred early in 1898, published the 25th German edition, in which the application of several of the remedies has been greatly enlarged and considerable new matter added. This edition has just been translated into English.

Notwithstanding that Dr. Schussler denies in the later editions of his work all connection with Homoeopathy, and insists that his method is not based upon the homoeopathic law of cure, but upon physiologico-chemical processes that take place within the organism, it is nevertheless true that the present wide adoption of the Tissue Remedies in the treatment of disease is the fruit of the seed sown on homoepathic ground
as early as 1832, although its development was slow until Schussler gave it a wonderful impetus by bringing physiological chemistry and physiological and petdlacibel facts to bear on his therapeutic procedure

THE THEORY OF SCHUSSLER’S BIOCHEMIC SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

The idea upon which Biochemic Therapeutics is based is the physiological fact that both the structure and vitality of the organs of the body are dependent upon certain necessary quantities and proper apportionment of its inorganic constituents. These remain after combustion of the tissues and form the ashes.

These inorganic constituents are, in a very real sense, the material basis of the organs and tissues of the body, and are absolutely essential to their integrity of structure and functional activity. According to Schussler’s theory, any disturbance in the molecular motion of these cell salts in living tissues, caused by a deficiency in the requisite amount, constitutes disease, which can be rectified and the requisite equilibrium re-established by administering the same minezal salts in small quantities. This is supposed to be brought about by virtue of the operation of chemical affinity in the domain of histology ; and hence this therapeutic procedure is styled by Schussler the Biochemic method, and stress is laid on the fact that it is in supposed harmony with well-known facts and laws in physiological chemistry and allied sciences.

FOUNDATION OF BIOCHEMIC SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

The foundation of Biochemistry was laid more than a century ago when Rudolph Virchow, one of the foremost scientists of the day, discovered that the human body is composed of an enormous number of tiny, living cells, each one made up of an infinitesimal but perfectly balanced quantity of three classes of materials; water, organic Substances, inorganic substances,

Water and organic matter, such as sugar, albuminous and fatty substances make up the greater portion of the body. The inorganic (mineral) elements, however, although present invery much smaller quantities, are really vital elements; active workers which utilise theorganic substances in building the millions of cells of which the body is composed.


The life of these cells is of short duration. Millions of them are constantly breaking down and new ones are just as rapidly being built up. The necessary material for thiscontinuous rebuilding being supplied from the blood stream. Hence it can readily be seenthat, if the blood lacks the necessary quantities of these active, life-giving, inorganicelements, the rebuilding process cannot proceed in a normal orderly manner, and theresulting disturbance of the bodily rhythm gives rise to what is called “disease” in one ofits many and varied forms.

A shortage or deficiency of one or several of these vital mineral substances may arise from a variety of causes; injuries, self-poisoning and obscure influences which in manyinstances science has not yet been able to explain. The fact we have to recognise is that“disease” - the word simply means lack of ease - indicates a disturbance of the bodilyrhythm; a disturbance which interferes with the assimilation and transport of the vitalmaterials essential for the repair and maintenance of living tissues. Obviously, if thecells do not receive their proper nourishment and are not cleansed of the poisonous wastematerial resulting from cellular activity, ill-health becomes inevitable.

THE TWELVE TISSUE SALTS

The twelve biochemic remedies of Schuessler, sometimes referred to as mineral salts or tissue salts (we use the term, tissue salts), are absolutely harmless; they are not drugsin any sense of the word. They simply provide to the system the deficient inorganicelements, prepared homoeopathically, in an extremely finely subdivided form - a formwhich ensures their ready assimilation and a speedy restoration of that balance andharmony in the system which spell health and happiness.

There is nothing miraculous in the action of these remedies; their virtues are derived from the application of principles based upon the laws of nature. They are to the ailingwhat food is to the starving man. They bring ease by the logical process of removing the
cause of disease. The biochemic system of medicine rests upon a firm foundation; it hasstood the test of searching investigation. The more recentdiscoveries in the field ofbiological research, and the findings of present-day biochemists, confirm its teachings. Infact, later discoveries, made after his death, serve to pay handsome tribute to thewonderful insight and true medical genius of Dr. W. H. Schuessler, the founder ofBiochemistry.

THE TWELVE TISSUE SALTS
The Abbreviated Names by which they are usually known are as follows :
CALC FLUOR (Calcium Fluoride)
CALC PHOS (Calcium Phosphate)
CALC SULPH (Calcium Sulphate)
FERR PHOS (Iron Phosphate)
KALI MUR (Potassium Chloride)
KALI PHOS (Potassium Phosphate)


Biochemic System of Medicine 661

7. KALI SULPH (Potassium Sulphate)
8. MAG PHOS (Magnesium Phosphate)
9. NAT MUR (Sodium Chloride)
10. NAT PHOS (Sodium Phosphate)
11. NAT SULPH (Sodium Sulphate)
12. SILICA (Silica Oxide)

INORGANIC CONSTITUENTS OF CELLS

The principal inorganic materials of nerve-cells are Mag-nesia phos., Kali phos.,
Natrum and Ferrum. Muscele-cells contain the same, with the addition of Kali mur.
Connective tissue-cells have for their specific substance Silica, while that of the
elastic tissue-cells is probably Calcarea fluor. In bone-cells we have Calcarea fluor
and Magnesia phos. and a large proportion of Calcarea phos. This latter is found in small
quantities in the cells of muscle, nerve, brain and connective tissue. Cartilage and
mucous cells have for their specific inorganic material Natrum mur., which is found
also in all solid and fluid parts of the body. Hair and the crystalline lens contain,
among other inorganic substances, also Ferrum. The carbonates, as such, are, according
to Moleschott, without any influence in the process of cell-formation

THE PRINCIPAL INORGANIC MATERIALS OF CELLS

Nerve-cells - Magnesia phos., Kali phos., Natrum and Ferrum.
Muscle-cells - Magnesia phos., Kali phos., Natrum and Ferrum., Kali mur.
Connective tissue-cells have - Silica

Elastic tissue-cells - Calcarea fluor.

Bone-cells - Calcarea fluor, Magnesia phos. and a large proportion of
Calcarea phos.

Cartilage and mucous cells - Natrum mur.
Hair and the crystalline lens - among other inorganic substances, also Ferrum.

* Calc. phos is found in small quantities in the cells of muscle, nerve, brain and
connective tissue.

* Natrum mur. also found in all solid and fluid parts of the body.

PREPARATION AND DOSE

The Tissue Remedies are prepared for therapeutic purposes, like all homoeopathic
remedies, according to the decimal or centesimal scale in trituration or dilution.

SCHUSSLER’S OWN PROCEDURE

At first Schussler began with the sixth centesimal or twelfth decimal trituration; but
he, very early in his practice, adopted the sixth decimal preparation as the one mostQu,


generally useful. Lately the lower triturations of Potassium and Sodium salts, the third
decimal, of others the fourth and fifth, have been productive of equally good results. In
the last edition of his “Abgekurzte Therapie” he says on this point: “In my practice |
employ the sixth decimal trituration generally. Ferrumphos., Silicea and Calcarea fluar,
I usually give in the 12th trituration. In acute diseases, a dose consisting of a powder,
size of a pea, should be given every hour or two; in chronic diseases 3 or 4 times daily.
The powder may be given dry on the tongue, or dissolved in a spoonful of water.”

We, ourselves, have had the most satisfactory results from the sixth decimal
trituration, rarely going higher, at times lower, and generally we prefer to give the
selected remedy in solution by dissolving a good-sized powder in a tumbler, half full of
water, and administering teaspoonful doses every hour or two.

These triturations may be moulded into tablets usually of one grain each; the dose
being two or three taken dry on tongue or dissolved in water.

If liquid solutions are used, a few drops may be dissolved in water, or pellets or disks
may be saturated and given in that way. The latter is especially to be recommended with
children.

FREQUENCY OF DOSES
(a) In acute cases - a dose every hour or two
(b) In severe, painful affections - a dose every ten to fifteen minutes
(c) In chronic affections - one to four doses daily

In suitable cases the external use of the remedies is indicated and has been found
useful. For this purpose the lower triturations may be used.

In determining the dose of a biochemic remedy, the amount of the morbid product
involved is no important factor. For instance, a very small deficiency of Natrum mur. in
the cells of the epithelial layer of a serous sac may give rise to a massive serous
exudation; and as minute a supply of Natrum mur. corresponding to the deficiency may
bring about a complete resorption of the exudation.

Guided by the relative quantities of the cell salts, each practitioner can select the
proper dose of the indicated biochemic remedy.

One milligramme of a substance is estimated to contain 16 trillions of molecules.
According to this estimate, the 6th decimal trituration of it would contain about 16
billions; this quantity is more than sufficient to restore disturbed molecular motions to
the normal.

RELATION OF THE BIOCHEMIC TO THE HOMCEOPATHIC TREATMENT

Often the question has been asked, “is Schueslerism Homeopathy?” and it has as
often been answered in the affirmative as in the negative. Schuessler himself claimed
that it is not in any way related to Homoeopathy, claiming for it a separate system of
therapeutics.
Biochemic System of Medicine 663

He claims with others that the Tissue Remedies act by supplying deficiencies. This
jdea, taken literally, seems erroneous; for example, in a disturbance of the molecules of
Natr. mur. there is not necessarily a deficiency in the amount Natr. mur. in the body, but
rather a lack of continuity in the arrangement of the existing molecules in the body. This
salt given as a remedy does not supply a lack or deficiency of salt, as the quantity given
js usually too infinitesimal for the purpose, and were this the case it might be given in
quantity with food and drink with the desired effect. The deficiency that it does supply
in minimal doses is in the arrangement of the equilibrium of the chain of Natr. mur.
molecules in the affected tissues, thus causing them to perform their function properly;
for, since the deficit is a molecular one, the supply must also be molecular.

This idea of the action of remedies is not new, as any one who has carefully perused
the works of that astute observer, Von Grauvogl, can testify. Many of Schussler’s ideas
are foreshadowed in Grauvogl and Hering.

The following table shows, so far as analyses have been made, that the twelve tissue
salts are constituents of many of our well known and proved remedies of the vegetable
kingdom:

TABLE

Ferr. phos. China, Gelsem., Veratr., Aeon., Arnica, Anis. stel., Phytol., Serb, vulg.,
Rhus, Asaf. (4), Viburn. pr., Secale (.25), Graphites (2.74), Rumex, Ailan
thus.

Cale. phos. China, Viburn. pr., Ail., Phytol., Berb. vulg., Coloc. (27), Graphites.

Natr. phos. Rheum, Ail., Anis. stel., Hamam.

Kali phos. Pulsat., Bapt., Rhus, Veratr., Epiphegus, Viburn, pr., Digit., Cimicif.,
Cactus gr., Stramon., Xanth., Ail., Anis. stel., Hamam., Phytol., Cactus.

Kali mur. Phytol., Sanguin., Stilling., Pinus c., Asclep., Viburn. pr., Ail,, Anis. stel.,

| Hamam., Cimicif.

Natr. mur. Cedron, Arum tr., Ail,, Anis. stel., Hamam., Cimicif., Secale (.50).

Cale. fluor. Phytol.

Silicea Equisetum (nearly 18.2), Cimicif. (4.), Chelidon., Graphites (13.),

Secale (15), Lycopodium.
Cale. sulph. Apocyn., Ail., Asaf. (6.2).

Natr. sulph. Apocyn., Iris v., Chamom., Chionanthus, Lycop., Bryon., Podoph.,
Chelid., Nux vom., Anis. stel., Hamam., Cimicif,

Kali sulph. Pulsat., Hydrast., Myr. cer., Cimicif., Phytol., Viburn. pr., Anis. stel.,
Hamam.

Magnes. phos. | Viburn. op., Bellad., Lobel., Stramon., Viburn. pr., Ail, Secale  (.50),
Coloc. (3), Gelsem., Rhus. Graphites.

Natrum mur. Arum triphyllum,

The figures in the above table indicate the percentage.



This table is a very incomplete one, as analyses have only been made of
comparatively few of the remedies of the animal and vegetable kingdom.

It is highly probable that we, by this means, could easily explain why the symptoms
of one drug are so often found under the pathogencsis of another, why one is
characteristic in one drug and only generic in another, when, indeed, it may not rightly
belong to either, but to an inorganic tissue salt, a constituent of each drug.

Schuessler, in several of his editions, admits this and says that disturbed molecular
motion of inorganic cell salts showing itself as disease is rectified by Biochemistry
directly by the administration of homogeneous substance, whereas it is rectified by
Homoeopathy indirectly by the administration of heterogeneous substance.

THE TWELVE TISSUE SALTS

Their Place and Function in the Human Economy

In order to obtain the most satisfactory results from Dr. Schuessler’s Biochemic
System of Medicine, one should first of all become acquainted with the tissue salts
individually. A knowledge of the properties and the field of action of each of these
remedies will be found invaluable when the symptoms of any given case are being
considered. In the following brief review, an attempt has been made to bring out the
dominant characteristics of each of the tissue salts and thus to make quicker and easier
the right choice of remedy.


CALCAREA FLUORICA

Synonym : Common Names:

Calci Fluoridum Fluoride of Lime

Calcium fluoride Fluor-spar

Calcium fluoride is found in the surface of the bones, the enamel ofthe teeth, the elastic fibres, in the vascular walls and the cells of the skin.

Loss of its ability to unite with organic matter causes a continueddilation or relaxed condition of thesefibres. If the elastic fibres of anyportion of the vessels of theconnective tissue or of the lymphaticsystem have arrived at such acondition of relaxation, the absorption of a solid exudation in such a part cannot takeplace. This results in indurated glands, lumpy exudations on the surface of bone,encysted tumours, hard swellings, etc.

When the elastic fibres of the blood vessels sufier a disturbance of the molecules of Cale. Fluor., such pathological enlargements of blood vessels take place, which maketheir appearance as hemorrhoidal tumors, varicose and enlarged veins and vascular tumors, and indurated glands, post-partum haemorrage, uterine displacements andweakening of abdominal walls.

By supplying the lacking Calcium Fluoride the elastic fibres are again restored. to their integrity, resume their power of contractility and functions properly. Exudationsare thrown off and absorbed by the lymphatics.

In general, then, the administration of Calcium Fluoride is indicated in all diseasers which can be traced, directly or indirectly, to relaxed conditions of the elastic fibres ofthose ailments having their seat in the substance forming the surface of the bone, enamelof the teeth, walls of the blood vessels and the cells of the epidermis.

When a deficiency in this lime- salt, and consequently a deficiency of elastic fibre, occurs in connective tissue between the cerebrum and cerebellum, an abnormal processof thought occurs, causing groundless fears of financial ruin.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. Stony hard swelling anywhere in the body is its chief indication.

2. Dilatation, enlargement of the blood vessels, being the chief remedy to restore the contractility of the elastic fibres, Chief remedy for vascular tumours with dilated

blood vessels. Aneurism at an early stage may be reduced or kept in check by this remedy. Dilatation of the heart with palpitation. Enlargement, hypertrophy of heart. Chief remedy for varicose or enlarged veins or varicose ulcer.

. Enamal of the teeth rough and deficient. Unnatural looseness of the teeth with or without pain, teeth become loose in their sockets.

. If lacking in Calcium Fluoride, emotional symptoms include uncertainty and difficulty making choices. Groundless fears of financial ruin.

. Rectum: Hemorrhoids, when bleeding. Protruding and itching piles, blind piles,

accompanied with pain in back and constipation. Piles with rush of blood to the head, confined bowels, inability to expel the faeces, due to a relaxed condition of the rectum, allowing a too large accumulation of faecal matter. This condition is
frequently met with after confinement, when all the pelvic muscles are relaxed. Fissure of anus, sore crack near end of bowel; should also be used locally.

Fissure of the anus, fistulous ulcers, when secreting thick, yellow pus (Silicea, Calc.sulph).

. Female Sexual Organs : All displacements of the uterus require this remedy.

Falling of the womb. Anteversion, retroversion, and the flexions of the uterus require this salt to tone up the contractile muscles. Dragging pains in the groin andin the lower part of the back. Pains extend to the thighs. Menses excessive, flooding,with bearing-down pains. Uterus very relaxed and flabby, or very hard, like stone.Hard lump in the breast (Kali mur.).

. Circulatory Organ : Varicose veins. and also a tendeney to this condition . Veins seem as if they would burst use also a lotion of the drug. Dilation of the blood- vessels, the elastic fibres of the walls of the vessels have become relaxed; this is thechief remedy to restore their contractility. First stage of aneurism. Hypertrophy orenlargement of the heart. Irregularities of the heart’s action, when due to prolapsusof uterus and other relaxing diseases.

. Back and Extremities : Pain in lower part of back, weak, with dragging pains.

Burning pains in the sacrum with confined bowels. Lumbago from strains. Chronic cases of lumbago; aggravation on beginning to move and amelioration by continued motion. ; Inflammation of knee joint, chronic synovitis. Cracking in the joints. Hard swelling on the bone surface. Gouty enlargement of the joints. Ganglia or encysted tumors at the back of the wrist. Exotoses on fingers. Osseous tumor. Swelling of elbow-joint, crepitation, showing want of synovial fluid.

Varicose ulceration of the veins of the limbs; use also a lotion on cotton. Rubber bandages or elastic stockings should also be used.

. Neck and Back : Indurated cervical glands of stony hardness. Small stony hard goitres.

Skin : Chapped hands or lips from cold. Skin hard, thickened and horny; Fissures or cracks in the palms of the hands; mix a quantity of the drug in vaseline, and after washing the hands rub the ointment thoroughly.

Varicose ulcers of long standing have been cured by the remedy. “iczema due to venous hyperaemia; worse in damp weather, better at night. Eczema, with thickening and cracking of skin. Eczema of anus consequent to hemorrhoids.

Tissues : Solidified infiltrations; thus indurated glands of stony irardness. Osseous growths, especially in tarsal and carpal articulation. Knots and kernels and tumors in the female breast. Bruises on surface of bone, with hard, rough and uneven lumps, as on shin. Dropsy caused by heart disease. Swellings or indurated enlargements having their seat in the fasciae and capsular ligaments of joints or in
the tendons. Indolent ulcers.. Whitlow or felons. Exudation from surface of bones, which quickly harden and assume a nodular or jagged form.

12. Sleep :Vivid dreams, with sense of impending danger; of new scenes, places, etc.
13. Modalities : Worse in damp weather and during rest, better by cold fomentation, rubbing and heat.
CLINICAL USE

Calc Fluor is useful in the following diseases/conditions when the above characteristics are present.

¢ Boney growths, exostoses, aneurism

¢ Bone spurs and tumors

¢ Induration and stony hardness of glands

* Cataracts

° Scar tissue from X-rays, burns, and operations

© Varicose veins, ulcer, eczema, arteriosclerosis

¢ Hemorrhoids

¢ Lumbago

¢ Knee synovitis

* Gouty enlargement

¢ Joint disorders where they give way easily and dislocate
* Breast lump

* Goitre

* Deficient enamel in teeth and bone density

* Looseness of teeth

* Toothache

¢ Fissures and cracks in hand, skin, and elsewhere
¢ Hypertrophy and dilatation of heart

© Displacements of the uterus

© Uterine haemorrhage


CALCAREA PHOSPHORICA

Synonym : Common Names:
Calcium Phosphate Phosphate of lime

Calc. phos is a nutritive salt absolutely essential to theproper growth and nutrition of
the body. It promotes cell growth, supplying the first basis for the new tissue, hence necessary to initiate growth.
This salt is found in the blood plasma and corpuscles, saliva, gastric juice, bones and
other connective tissue, teeth, milk , etc.
'tcalcarea

This salt works with albumen, carries it to bone tissue or to any part of the body
where it may be needed. It uses albumen as a cement to build up bone structure. Thus it gives solidity to the bones.

Bone is fifty-seven per cent, phosphate of lime, the remainder gelatine; an
albuminous, gluey substance, carbonate of soda, magnesium phosphate and sodium
chloride. Without the lime phosphate no bone can be made. It is the nutritive salt for the
periostium and through it for bones.

Calcarea phos also supplies new blood cells, thus becoming the first remedy in anemia. Without Calc Phos there could be no blood coagulation.

Calcium phosphate is found in gastric juice, and a lack of the proper balance is frequently the cause of indigestion.

Conditions called rheumatism are sometimes due to a deficiency of the cell-salt. It is
well known to Biochemists that a proper balance of sodium phosphate is required to
prevent an acid condition from prevailing, and under certain conditions, when calcium
phosphate for any reason is not present in proper quantities, the affinities draw upon
sodium phosphate in an endeavor to supply the lack, and thus a deficiency in the alkaline
salts ensue, which allows an acid condition to prevail, i.e, rheumatism.

Calcium phosphate is an auxiliary to the therapeutical effects of magnesium
phosphate, as it more nearly resembles that salt than any other. When Magnes. phos. is
clearly indicated, and does not restore the normal condition in a reasonable length of
time, Calc. phos. should be given, for it is quite certain that it has been drawn on from
the blood to assist the work of Magnes. phos., hence the deficiency in the lime-salt.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. This tissue salt is concerned with the formation of bone and teeth and thus becomes
an important remedy for children. It aids growth and normal development and
should be given in cases of backwardness more particularly where there is bone
weakness or recurring tooth troubles.

2. Tardy formation of callus around the ends of fractured bones, in the unnatural
growth and defective nutrition of bone and other textures found in rickets and
similar diseased conditions; thus the sphere of action of this remedy includes al!
bone diseases.

3. Defective nutrition, imperfect cell-growth and consequent decay and destruction of
tissue, especially the osseous and glandular systems. It is of use during dentition,
in convulsions and spasms occurring in weak, scrofulous subjects, stimulating
nutrition, etc.

4. It promotes healthy cellular activity and restores tone to weakened organs and
tissues. This is the remedy for any period of convalescence; its restorative power
will speed recovery and replenish the body’s reserves of strength. Cale Phos has
always been prized as a restorative.

Another important feature is its restorative power after acute diseases, either
directly or preparing the way for other remedies, by stimulating the system to their
action, thus becoming an important intercurent remedy.

Practically, this drug proves itself a real tonic in chronic wasting diseases. In
anemia of young, rapidly growing people; in women weakened by rapid child-
bearing, prolonged suckling or excessive menstruation or leucorrhea; in
accompanying diseases with exhaustive discharges, as in chronic bronchitis,
tubercular diarrhea and night-sweats, abscesses and scrofulous sores, through its
great power on the secretions, it acts curatively.

5. It is a constituent of saliva and gastric juice. It assists digestion and assimilation
and favours the building up of a sturdy, robust constitution.

6. In old age, where the regenerative function decreases in the nervous tissue, Cale.
phos. is well indicated, and we find it useful in senile cutaneous and vaginal itching,
as well as during reconvalescence from severe acute diseases. In tuberculosis
pulmonum, with its emaciation, night-sweats, hemoptysis and other marked
physical symptoms, Cale. phos. in low potencies holds out great promise to
ameliorate the severity of the case; equally great is its benefit in pollutions of young
married men (and sexual excitement of women) and onanists. In the osseous
expansions of rachitic children.

7. Cale Phos is the tissue salt for anemia and conditions associated with imperfect
circulation. In the anaemic states often seen in young girls, this remedy should be
given. 10 grains of the second trituration of Cal.phos. is preferable to the usual iron
treatment.

Spasms and pains caused by anemia are cured by this remedy. These pains are
accompanied by formication, sensation of coldness and of numbness.

PAins where bones form sutures or symphyses and numb, crawling: pains with chilliness, due to anemic symptoms, worse from wet, and tendency to perspiration and glandular enlargement. Sensations mostly in small spots. Phosphatic diathesis.
General lack of vital heat and aggravation from wet.

If the molecular motion of Calc. phos. is disturbed within the epithelial cells of serous membranes, a sero-albuminous exudation within the sacs takes place. In this way develop hydrops genu, hygroma patelle, etc. Minute doses of Calc. phos. will absorb these exudations.

If the cells of the epidermis have lost Cale. phos. albumen will be thrown upon the surface and by drying, form a crust, a desquamation of which can be brought about therapeutically by administering Calc. phos. Similar albuminous secretions take place on mucous surfaces, if their epithelium is diseased through loss of Calc. phos.
Calc Phos pains can be severe and “fixing” and they tend to be worse at night. There may be a creeping sensation of the skin, also numbness and coldness of the limbs.

CLINICAL USE

Hence it is useful in the following diseases/conditions
All bone diseases, bone deficiencies
Non-union of bones,
Soft, thin, brittle bones
Growing pains
Osteoporosis
Delayed dentition of children
Poor nutrition

Rickets, open fontanelles,Emaciated children with shrunken bodies and flabby bellies
Chronic diseases with loss of weight Soft, thin, brittle bones

Growing pain

Anemia
Old age tonic
Albuminuria
Recovery from injury and illness

Improves memory and relieves nervousness when nutrition is deficient 

CALCAREA SULPHURICA

Synonym : Common Names:

Calcium Sulphate Gypsum, Plaster of Paris

Calcarea sulph stands in close relation to suppurations. It cures purulent discharges from the mucous membranes and purulent exudations in serous sacs, as well as tubercular ulcers or abscesses of the intestines, and ulcers of the cornea, etc. It is curative in suppurations at that stage in which matter isdischarging or continuing to ooze after the infiltrated places have discharged their contents of pus. Allailments in which the process of discharge continues too long and the suppuration isafiecting the epithelial tissues. Acts upon the connective tissue. If there is a deficiency ofit in any small part of its domains, suppuration is the result and allows suppuration tocontinue too long. Thus a deficiency of this salt causes long protracted suppurations. Itcontrols suppuration. The presence of pus with a vent is the general indication. The third stage of all catarrhs, lung troubles, boils, carbuncles, ulcers or abscessesneed this cell-salt.

Calc *Sulph cleans out the accumulation of non-functional, organic matter in the tissues and causes infiltrated parts to discharge their contents readily, throwing- offdecaying organic matter, so that it may not lie dormant or slowly decay and thus injurethe surrounding tissues.

Calc Sulph is indicated in conditions arising from impurities in the blood steam. It supplements the action of Kali Mur in the treatment of catarrh, acne, etc. and it shouldalways be given when pimples occur in adolescence.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. It is indicated in the third stage of all suppurative process when the discharge is thick, yellow, purulent and sometimes tinged with blood.
2. In all cases of suppuration, when the discharge continues too long and the sore is unhealthy.
3. Symptoms are aggravated by getting wet or by washing and working in water; overheated; warmth and are better in a warm, dry atmosphere.
4. Follows Silicea well, and will cause the wound to heal. While silica hastens the process of suppuration in a normal manner, Calc. sulph.    closes up the process at the proper time if it is present in the blood in proper quantity.


CLINICAL USE

It is useful in following diseases when the above c aracteristic symptoms are present:
Any long protractive suppurative diseases or conditions anywhere in the body: ulcers, boils, carbuncles, felons, pimples and pustules etc.
. In all ailments where pus-formations are liable to develop or have already developed.
. Neglected wounds, cuts, etc., when discharging pus, and when they do not heal readily.
. Burns and scalds (after Kali mur. ) , when suppurating.
. Pimples on the faces of young people at the age of puberty
. Inflammation of the eyes, ears Skin affections, with yellow scabs {Kali mur.).
. Crusta lactea (scald-head), with yellow crusts or secretions.
. Diseases of the mouth, if accompanied with purulent secretions.
. Ulceration at the roots of the teeth, with swelled gums and cheeks; to abort or control the suppuration
. Chronic catarrh {Kali sulph., Silicea).
  All ailments of the throat in the third stage of the inflammation: sore throat, quinsy and tonsilitis
 
 Last stages of consumption, last stage of croup, pneumonia or bronchitis. Generally indicated after Kali mur.
 Pus forming in cavity of lung or pleura Advanced stages of lung diseases

e Leucorrhcea
© Gonorrhoea
© Malignant growths after ulceration has set in. Apply locally to the parts on lint.


FERRUM PHOSPHORICUM

Synonym : Common Names:
Ferri phosphas Phosphate of Iron

Ferr Phos is the pre-eminent Biochemic First Aid. It is the oxygen carrier. It enters into the composition of haemoglobin. It takes up oxygen from the air inhaled by the lungs and carries it inthe blood stream to all parts of the body thus helps to sustain life. Without a proper balance ofiron in the blood, health cannot be maintained.When a deficiency in this cell-salt occurs, the circulation is increased, for the blood tries tocarry enough oxygen to all the tissues of the body with the limited amount of iron at hand, and in order to do so must move rapidly; exactly as seven men must move faster in order toaccomplish as much work as could ten, moving at a slower pace.

This increased motion being changed to heat, by the law of the conservation of energy, is called fever. It is not the fever or heat alone that causes the condition of “notat ease “ in the patient, but the deficiency in iron molecules, and a consequent lack ofoxygen. This molecular disturbance soon breaks up continuity of other cell-salts. Adeficiency in potassium chloride nearly always follows a deficiency in iron, unless themissing links be quickly supplied. The cell-salt potassium chloride controls the fibrin inthe circulation, and when the particles of salt fall below the standard, a portion of fibrin,not having workmen to use it, becomes a disturbing element and leaves the vitalcirculation. If it is thrown off through the lungs, a cough is produced (nature’s spasmodiceffort to get rid of the heteroplasm). In some instances the lung tissue becomes soirritated and inflamed that the doctors declare that the ’ cold ’ settled on the lungs andgave the patient the pneumonia. If the fibrinous exudation is thrown off through thenasal passages, it is called catarrh. The word catarrh is from the Greek, and simplymeans to “drop down,” therefore, is no help to the pathology of the condition.

A lack of ferrum molecules, viz.: a proper balance in the blood, is the cause of“colds.” When a deficiency of iron occurs, nature, or the natural law, draws the bloodaway from the outer parts, the skin, in order to carry on the process of life more perfectlyabout the heart, lungs, liver, stomach, brain, etc. A lack of blood in the minute blood-vessels of the skin allows the pores to close, and waste matter that should escape by thisroute is turned upon the inner organs. This accumulation, together with certain organicmatter thrown out of the blood, caused by deficienciesin certain inorganic salts, formsthe exudation of colds, catarrh, pneumonia, plourisy, ete.For all such conditions, whenever there isinflammation, under whatever name it may be known, Ferr. phos. is the chief remedy. Hence Iron Phosphate (Ferrum Phos) is considered as “Inflammation Remedy”It gives strength and toughness to the circular walls of the blood vessels, especiallythe arteries. Freely circulating, oxygen-rich blood is essential to health and life, and forthis reason Ferr Phos should always be considered as a supplementary remedy, nomatter what other treatment may be indicated by the symptoms.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. Fever : A deficiency of this cell salt is the cause of fevers and inflammatory
conditions and so indicated in all febrile disturbances and in inflammatory and
congestive diseases at the beginning, especially before exudation has commenced.
The principal accompaniments of these conditions calling for Ferrum Phos are
manifested by flushed face, fever with full pulse, hot, dry skin, thirst, pain and
redness of the part. It should be administered at frequent intervals until the
inflammatory symptoms subside.
Useful in the first stage of enteric, gastric, typhoid, typhus, rheumatic and scarlet
fever, measles,chicken-pox,small-pox, etc., for the heat and congestion. Intermittent
fever, with vomiting of food; catarrhal fever, with quickened pulse and chilly
sensations.

2.Respiratory Organs : All inflammatory conditions of the respiratory tract, in the first stage, for the fever, heat and pain. Pneumonia, bronchitis, pleuritis, tracheitis, etc., in the inflammatory stage, and, indeed, as long as the pain lasts. It is followed well by Kali mur. in the second stage or that of expectoration of white mucus. Hemorrhages from the lungs, blood bright red. Expectoration scanty, streaked with
blood. Soreness of the chest. Breathing short and hurried at the beginning or during the course of the disease, when there is heat and fever present. Cold in the chest, with hard, dry cough and soreness in the lungs (Kali mur.’). Acute, painful, short, irritating cough. In the beginning of all coughs and colds this is the first remedy. Croup and whooping-cough, for the febrile conditions. Asthma, for the soreness of
the chest. Painful hoarseness and huskiness of speakers and singers, when due to the irritation of the bronchii (Calc. phos.). Congestion of the lungs, acute or chronic, with oppression and pain; catch in breath, pleurisy, pain in the side, in first stage.

3. It a first aid remedy for haemorrhages from any orifice of the body. Bleeding from wounds, cuts and abrasions can be controlled with a little powdered Ferr Phos, applied directly to the injured parts. A few tablets may be crushed for this purpose or the tablets may be dissolved and used as a lotion.
4. Especially effective in anemic people. It is also indicated where there is a lack of red blood corpuscles, as in anaemia.
5. Most of the ailments under this salt are of a congestive nature and are, therefore, relieved by cold and aggravated by motion.
6. Ferr Phos. should also be thought of as a first-aid in cases of muscular strains, sprains etc.
7. It is an excellent remedy for ailments associated with advancing years and it is one of the most frequently needed remedies in the treatment   of children’s ailments.
8. Ferr Phos. should always be considered as a supplementary remedy, no matter what other treatment may be indicated.

CLINICAL CASE
It is indicated in the following diseases or conditions when the indications noted above are in evidence :

e Fever — initial stage

¢ Catarrhal colds

¢ Pleuritis, tonsillitis

¢ Brochitis

e Throat infections

e Early stages of Pneumonia
© Conjunctivitis

* Inflammatory rheumatism.

Gastritis, laryngitis, mastitis

Cystitis

e Earache

e Headache with a scratchy sore throat.

e Anemia — loss of vitality, after surgery, radiation

e Never been well since hemorrhage, uterine hemorrhage, bleeding fibroids

Predisposition of epistaxis in children

Bleeding hemorrhoids

Blood in the urine with no symptoms

Nose bleeding (Phos primary remedy)

¢ Helps people recover from infectious disease, travel, fatigue.
e Hematachlorosis — too many red blood cells

© Capillary fragility — bruise easily

e Low blood pressure — poor circulation.


~ KALI MURIATICUM

Synonym : Common Names:
Potassium Chloride Chloride of Potash

It is contained in nearly all the cells and is chemically related to fibrin. Disturbances in its molecular action cause fibrinous exudations.

When the cells of the epidermis, in consequence of any irritation, lose molecules of Kali mur. then the fibrin comes to the surface as a
white or whitish-grey exudation. This, when dried, forms a mealy eruption. If the irritation extends to
the tissues beneath the epidermis, both fibrin and serum will exude, and the affected part of the skin
will be pushed up in the form of blisters. This is exactly what takes place in small-pox, cow-pox vaccine disease. Similar processes may take
place in and below epithelial cells.

This gives the indication for it in catarrhs, in croupous and diphtheritic exudations, and in the second stage of inflammation of serous membranes when the exudation is plastic or fibrinous in character. These are practically the whole of the cardinal
indications in which Kali m. has been prescribed.

If the integrity of the affected tissue again restored by the administration of Kali Mur. molecules, then a reabsorbtion ot throwing off the exudation occurs probably by the formation of hydrochloric acid formed by one part of chlorine from the KCL with hydrogen.

Kali Mur is the remedy for sluggish conditions. It combines with the organic substance fibrin. Thus a deficiency of this tissue salt causes fibrin to become nor- functional, and to be thrown off in the form of thick, white discharges, giving rise te catarrhs and similar symptoms affecting the skin and mucous membranes.

Its action is complementary to that of Calc Sulph, as both remedies are concerned with cleansing and purifying the blood. In conditions calling for Kali Mur, the blood tends to thicken and to form clots. In alternation with Ferr Phos it is frequently needed for the
treatment of children’s ailments.

Kali Mur is the remedy for thick, white fibrinous discharges. Other prominent symptoms are a white-coated tongue and light-coloured stools (lack of bile). Torpidity of the liver is another indication. In alternation with Ferr Phos it is frequently needed in the treatment of inflammatory diseases, particularly those affecting respiration - coughs, colds, sore throats, tonsillitis, bronchitis, etc., also for children’s ailments such as measles and chicken pox and where there are soft swellings, e.g. mumps, croup.

Kali Mur is concerned with the production of saliva and is therefore important in the early stages of digestion. The symptoms may be worse after eating fatty or rich foods and

Kali Muriaticum orn 677

there may be lack of appetite. With Nat Mur it is utilised in the production of hydrochloric acid, and is thus an essential link in the process of digestion. This tissue salt is useful as a first aid for the treatment of burns. Kali Mur & Ferrum Phos the top two tissue salts for colds. Kali Mur for the runny nose. Sinusitis, the mucous looks like uncooked or slightly soft-boiled egg white, mucous clear to white but not sticky. Mucous can get thick white later on.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS
1. Kali mur. corresponds to the second stage of inflammation of serous membrane when the exudation is of a plastic or fibrinnous character.
2. Whiteness : The great keynote of Kali-m. is, whiteness. Whiteness of secretions, exudations, eruptions of tissues The principal general
characteristic symptoms are a white or grey coating at the base of the tongue, white or grey exudations, glandular swellings, discharges or expectoration of a thick, white fibrinous slime or phlegm from any mucous surface, or flour-like scaling of the skin.
3. The next is, toughness. Fibrinous exudations and discharges
4. The symptoms are worse by motion, and worse by any fatty or rich food or pastry. Worse by warmth of bed
5. All stomach and bowel symptoms are worse after eating fats, pastry or any rich food. Pains are increased and aggravated by motion.

CLINICAL USE
It is useful for the following diseases/ailments when the general conditions of Kali mur. as noted above are present
¢ Throat, sinus and upper respiratory system with white discharges
¢ Chronic catarrhal condition of middle ear. Ear infections with too much fluid,pressure in the ear. Use after an ear infection, for people who can’t hear well after an ear infection — hearing, deafness
© Blocked eustachian tubes — relieves ear pressure when flying
* Snapping and noises in the ear
© White blisters, shingles
° Burns
* Cysts with white discharge
¢ Rheumatism
e Allergies — clear white discharges and white flakey skin
e Swimmer’s ear. (Merc dulcis), then Kali Mur
A preventive for people flying in a plane to prevent the ear drums from clogging up and sensitivity to pressure. The feeling that the ears won’t pop.
© Vaginitis — white thick or clear — like eggwhite, milky discharge
e White flaky dandruff


KALI PHOSPHORICUM

Synonym : Common Names:
Potassium Phosphate Phosphate of potash The gray matter of the brain is controlled
entirely by the inorganic cell-salt, potassium phosphate. This salt unites with albumen, and by
the addition of oxygen creates nerve-fluid, or the gray matter of the brain. Of course, there is a trace of other salts and other organic matter in nerve-fluid, but potassium phosphate is the chief factor, and has the power within itself to a.trac.,
by its own law of affinity, all things needed to manufacture the elixir of life. Therefore, when nervous symptoms arise, due to the tact that the nerve-fluid has been exhausted from any cause,the phosphate of potassium is the only true remedy, because nothing else can possibly supply the deficiency. The ills arising from too rapidly consuming the gray matter of the brain cannot be overestimated, and if all who are inclined to nervous disorders would carry Kali phos. with them, in tablet form, a large amount of sickness and suffering would be prevented.
Kali phos. is the most wonderful curative agent ever discovered by man, and the blessings it has already conferred on the race are many.

This cell salt treats the state of worn out mothers, over-worked business people, or anyone who has endured an intense physical/mental strain that has drained their system. Kali phos will quickly restore the equilibrium.

We find this potassium salt largely predominates in nerve-fluid, and that a deficiency produces well-defined symptoms. The beginning and end of the matter is to supply the lacking principle, and in molecular form, exactly as nature furnishes it in vegetables,
fruits and grain. To supply deficiencies—this is the only law of cure.

POTASSIUM PHOSPHATE (KALI PHOS) “NERVE REMEDY”

Dr. Schuessler observed that Potassium Phosphate has an important impact on:

e Brain

e Nerves — Vasomotor, sensory, motor, and sympathetic

e Muscles

e Blood

e Intercellular fluids

678


Kali Phosphoricum 679

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. Kali phos., the great nerve and brain remedy, is indicated, and is the chief remedy
in all mental disorders, when arising from a want of nerve or brain power. A
deficiency of this salt is indicated by the following symptoms:

e Brain-fag from overwork.

¢ Depressed spirits, irritability, impatience and nervousness

¢ Crossness of children, ill-tempered, fretfulness, crying and screaming.
e Fear

¢ Poor memory (Cale. phos. intercurrently)

¢ Screaming of children at night during sleep, sometimes from worms

e Anxiety, gloomy moods, fancies, nervous dread, forebodings, looks on the dark
side of life.

¢ Dull, no energy

¢ Fainting and tendency to fainting in nervous, sensitive persons

e Insanity and other mental disorders

¢ Delirium tremens (Natr. mur.)

© Softening of the brain, mental illusions and aberrations, grasping at imaginary
objects

¢ Backwardness, shyness, sensitiveness

¢ Delirium during the course of any febrile disease (Ferr. phos., Natr. mur.).

¢ Puerperal mania, hysteria, fits of laughing and crying, melancholia,

e Overstrain of the mind from continual mental employment, business worry, etc.

e Sighing, weariness and depression

¢ Somnambulism in children

¢ Homesickness, haunted by visions of the past
Rest and Kali phos. will keep thousands of such cases out of the insane asylum.

2. Sleep

¢ Sleeplessness from nervous causes, often after worry or excitement.

© Wakefulness from overpressure of blood to the head, Stimulates gray nervous
matter, thereby causing contraction of the arteries and diminished flow of blood
to the brain.

¢ Walking in sleep {Somnambulism).

¢ Hysterical yawning; yawning, stretching and weariness, arising from nervous
causes, sometimes with feeling of emptiness of the stomach, although food is not
needed.

© Constant dreaming of fire, robbers, of falling, ghosts etc. lascivious dreams

¢ Night terrrors of children

e Awakening from sound sleep screaming with fright

© No desire to rise in the morning

 Modalities

© General modalities - better from rest, nourishment and heat. Symptoms are
generally aggravated by noise, exertion — both mental and physical, excitement,
worry, arising from a sitting position, etc.
. Pains worse by cold air, continued exercise and after rest
. Symptoms are generally ameliorated by gentle motion, eating, excitement or pleasant company; worse when alone.

CLINICAL USE
One may apply this remedy for the following conditions and indications:
© Mental exhaustion, neurological overwhelm, weak memory
¢ Mental deterioration, senility and Alzheimer’s disease
e Chronic fatigue from overuse of the intellect
e Insomnia — difficulty sleeping after midnight, nightmares
° Hayfever
¢ Shyness and depression

¢ Nerve tonic — “homeopathic valium”


KALI SULPHURICUM

Synonym : Common Names:
Potassium Sulphate Sulphate of Potash

This remedy, according to Schussler, is the function remedy of the epidermis and of the epithelium. A deficiency of this cell salt causes a yellow, slimy deposit on the tongue, slimy, thin, or decidedly yellow or greenish discharge and secretions of watery matter from any of the
mucous surfaces, and epithelial or epidermal desquamation. The yellowness is probably due to retrograde metamorphosis — fatty degeneration of inflammatory products and of affected epithelium, etc.

Kali sulph is found in the cells and in the intercellular fluids, muscles, nerves, epithelium and in the blood corpuscles. It plays an
important role as the carrier of oxygen. A deficiency of Kali sulph may, according to location and extent, occasion the following symptoms: Feeling of heaviness and weariness, vertigo, chilliness, palpitation, fear, melancholy, toothache, headache, pains in the limbs, which intermit and change location. These pains are worse in closed rooms, warmth and towards evening and better in fresh, open air that is rich in oxygen.

Epidermis and epithelial cells poorly fed with oxygen loosen and desquamate freely. If oxygen is brought to the suflering parts by means of Kali sulph. the formation of new cells is thereby furthered, and these hasten, by their activity, to promote the desquamation of the old ones.

Dr. Schuessler found that potassium sulphate is instrumental in the oxygen exchange with iron in all cells that contain iron. Thus we sffinity with the respiratory system. Deficient amounts of Kali sulph are seen with symptoms of weariness, congestion of yellow mucus, boils, and second stage infections.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS
The chief indications for this remedy are as follows:
1. It is applicable to the third stage of inflammmation.
2. Profuse yellow mucous discharge. Yellow stools, yellow diarrhea, yellow slimy tongue
3. Profuse desquamation of epidermis. Eczema, the skin peels off} sometimes with a thick yellow discharge. There can be much itching which is worse at night.
4. All ailments are worse in a warm room and toward evening and better in cool, open air.
5. Wandering pains
6. Hot flashes and < heat and night time

CLINICAL USE

Kali sulph primarily affects lungs and skin. Below is the list of disorders where this cell salt truly acts as a best biochemic medicine when the above characteristic symptoms are present:
Upper respiratory tract infection Lung and bronchial infections
Asthma
Sinusitis
Ear infections and stoppage of eustachian tube
Dandruff
Fungal and yeast infections
e Eczema

e Rheumatic pains

e Ringworm

e Leucorrehea

¢ Rattling in the lungs (Ant tart - white and thick expectoration with rattling,
Kali sulph expectoration is yellow)

e Earaches — if Pulsatilla doesn’t work use Kali Sulph, yellow discharge coming
out of the ear. (Kali Mur a white discharge or clear discharge out of the ear)

e For healthy hair and nails

Several other asthma remedies: according to the time of the asthma attack
e Arsenicum 11PM - 1AM
¢ Kali Arsenicum 1:30 — 2:30AM
¢ Kali Carb 2AM — 4AM
¢ Kali Sulph 3 AM —- 5AM
e Nat Sulph 4-5AM - 6AM



MAGNESIA PHOSPHORICA

Synonym : Common Names:
Magnesium Phosphate Phosphate of magnesia

Molecules of magnesium phosphate are found chiefly in the white fibres of the nerves and muscles. The white fibres seem to be
controlled by the molecular action of the magnesia cell-salt.When a deficiency in this
salt occurs, these white fibres contract, and produce a condition called spasms, or cramps.
Of course, it is simply nature’s language, saying: “I want more magnesium phosphate”.
Hence it is a remedy for cramps, convulsions, and other nervous phenomena.

When a deficiency of magnesium
phosphate occurs in the muscular tissue of the walls of the stomach, the white fibres
draw up, contract, and reduce the cavity of the stomach. Now, in order to meet this
condition and prevent a collapse, gas is formed by a natural process from the material at
hand, and by expansion produces a counter-force. Magnesium phosphate relieves such
conditions almost instantly by supplying deficiencies.

This wonderful curative agent is the true antispasmodic remedy. It has cured cases
of chorea, or St. Vitus’ dance, in from two to four weeks. For all heart troubles, so-called,
caused by a distension of the cardiac portion of the stomach, and thus interfering with
the action of the heart, it is the sovereign remedy.

Mag Phos is indicated for nerve pains, such as neuralgia, neuritis and sciatica, and
headaches accompanied by shooting, darting stabs of pain. It relieves muscular
twitching, cramps, hiccups, convulsive fits of coughing and those sudden, sharp twinges
of pain that are so distressing. It also relieves menstrual pains. Stomach cramps and
flatulence respond to treatment with this tissue salt.

The only exception to this rule of speedy cures by administering this remedy is where
the blood has furnished calcium phosphate as a substitute, in an effort to supply the
deficiency. Calcium phosphate more nearly corresponds to magnesium phosphate than
any other salt; therefore, when magnesium phosphate does not act very promptly,
calcium phosphate should be given, in order that the chain of molecules may be
completed in both of the disturbed salts,

Its main function is in connection with the nervous system where it supplements the action of Kali Phos.


CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. Dr. Schuessler found that Mag Phos has a great affinity for the nerves and muscles,
Thus it acts as an anti-spasmatic and greatly relieves nerve pain, cramps, and
convulsions and considered it as “The Pain Cell Salt”.

It corresponds to pains of all kinds with the exception of burning pains. Pains which
are darting, spasmodic, in character, boring, lightening-like, acccompanied by a
constrictive feeling. They are often changing in locality, and are relieved by warmth
and pressure. .

2. The Mag Phos condition is aggravated by cold and by touching and are relieved by
the application of heat, by pressure and by bending double.

CLINICAL USE
Think of Mag Phos for the following conditions:

Leg cramps in the night time

Injuries with shooting pains (follows Hypericum) Shooting, radiating pains of inflammation and/or nerve injury 
Whiplash and other spinal injuries

Facial tics and TMJ

Radiating tooth pain

Sciatic nerve pain

Menstrual cramps

Spasmotic coughing — croup, whooping cough
Colic in infants

Colitis, irritable bowel syndrome, stomach cramps
Parkinson’s disease

Epilepsy

Spasmodic retention of urine

Stomach cramps and flatulence

Nerve pains, such as neuralgia, neuritis and sciatica, and headaches

NOTE: Mag Phos will often act more rapidly when the tablets are taken with a sip of
hot water. The doses may be taken at frequent intervals until relief is obtained.


NATRUM MURIATICUM

Synonym : Common Names:
Sodium chloride Common salt

Dr. Schuessler observed that common salt is a constituent of every body cells as well as the blood. This salt distributes water, in proportion, throughout the organism. When this salt is notproperly distributed, there is disturbance of water in the human organism resulting excessive dryness in some parts and copious fluid in other parts, as in running coryza. Thus Sodium chloride (Natrum Mur) “balances bodily fluids” So watery blisters, watery coryza, watery diarrhoea, discharge of tears, watery leucorrhoea call for Natrum mur. Generally these people feel tired, sad and weep easily. While these people crave salt, the body cannot absorb it in  these crude amounts. Conversely, the effect of the minute quantity in the homeopathic preparation has a completely different and healing effect.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS
Indications for Nat mur include:
© The Nat mur state is often induced by grief
e Highly sensitive people who have walled off their emotions
e Exhaustion from mental overload
© Cold sores (esp. at corner of mouth) and herpes
e Hives
© Constipation
e Excessive thirst with dryness of skin, eyes, and throughout the body
e Water retention before menses
¢ Difficulty in urinating, esp. in public bathrooms
e Hay fever with great sneezing and nasal discharge like egg white
© Headaches, hammering sensation, blinding, worse and brought on by being in
the sun

CLINICAL USE
It is useful for the following diseases when the general conditions of Natrum

Muriaticum are in evidence, as noted :

Coryza

Rhinitis
Headache
Constipation
Skin disease
Malnutrition
Emaciation
Intermittent fever
Dropsy

Anaemia
Insomnia
Asthma, Bronchitis
Diabetes
Indigestion
Sun-stroke
Delirium tremens
House-maid knee
Hydrocele
Rheumatism
Neuralgia


NATRUM PHOSPHORICUM

Synonym : Common Names:
Sodium phosphate Phosphate of soda

This salt is found in the blood, muscles, nerve and brain-cells, as well as in the intercellular fluids. Through the presence of this
salt, lactic acid is decomposed into carbonic acid and water. It absorbs the carbonic acid, taking up two molecules for
every molecule of itself, and carries it to the lungs, where the oxygen of the air sets the carbonic acid free in exchange for oxygen, which latter is taken up by the iron contained in the blood corpuscles. Any deficiency in this prevents this chemical change, and the lactic
acid remains as such. An acid state of the system now prevails; rheumatism, dyspepsia, intestinal troubles, etc., ensue. According to Schussler, by the administration of molecular doses of this drug, this catalytic action is at once restored - the acid state ceases, and the
rheumatic and other symptoms subside.

Uric acid is kept soluble in the blood by the presence of the phosphate of soda and the natural temperature of the blood. Whenever there is a deficiency of this salt, uric acid is combined with the soda, forming the urate of soda, an insoluble salt and deposited near the points producing gout and acute inflammatory rheumatism.

Natrum phosph. serves to emulsify fatty acids; it is therefore a remedy for all dyspeptic conditions traceable to fats, or such as are aggravated by their use.

Natrum phos, is the remedy for conditions arising from excess of lactic acid. It prevents inspissation of the bile and mucus with crystallization of cholesterin in the gall duct and will thus remove the cause of many cases of jaundice, hepatic colic,
bilious headache and imperfect assimilation of fats from lack of bile.
It is useful gout, as well as in acute and chronic articular rheumatism, being thus a remedy for the so-called acid diathesis.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. Dr. Schuessler found that Nat Phos is indicated for excess of acid in the body as it assists in the breaking down of lactic acid. It helps restore proper pH balance in the body and neutralize acidic activity. This is a remedy for excess of acid in the system characterized generally by“sourness,” an excess of lactic acid. It relieves sour eructations or belching, or sourvomiting, or sour smelling diarrhoea in infants or adults; acidity. Dyspepsia, sour or acid. Perspiration smells sour. A biochemic anti-acid. It cures colic, spasm and fever when due to acid condition of the stomach; useful in all gastric derangements when acidity is present; useful in intestinal long or pinworms due to acidity.

2. The great keynote for this remedy is the moist, creamy or golden-yellow coating at the back part of the tongue

3. Discharges from the eyes, or sores, are yellow and creamy; tongue yellow; throat and tonsils are covered with yellow, creamy coating.

4. It helps people who cannot eat acidic foods (oranges, grapefruit, kiwi...), acidic high protein diets, and coffee drinkers.

CLINICAL USE
It is useful for the following diseases/ailments when the general conditions of Natrum phos. as noted above are present :

Indigestion: Digestive troubles like sour eructions, dyspepsia, acidity, acid stomach, heart burn, flatulence, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, morning sickness

Abdominal colic
Diarrhoea
Worms especially in children. Grinding the teeth and biting nails from worms, thread worms Gout

Rhemmatism

Lumbago

Cystitis — especially if after acidic foods or drinking alcohol

Vaginitis from excessive yeast and/or acidic foods

Good for detoxification

Hangovers (with Nux-v)

Food allergies

Wasting of bottle fed babies — inability to gain weight with good food intake

Sensitive to sugar — blood sugar issues. Never been well since intense diarrhoea
(flu or other cause), or loss of blood from hemorrhage (vital fluids)

Sour smell to body
Hives — esp. at ankles
Muscle pain

Sciatica

Acne

e Lithiasis

e Dyspepsia

© Uric acid deposits

e Chronic gastroenteritis
e Scrofulosis

e Cystitis

e Nocturnal enuresis

e Febrile conditions

e Eye complaints

e Atony of bladder

e Seminal emissions without dreams
e Hives

© Crusta lactea


NATRUM SULPHURICUM

Synonym : Common Names:
Sodium sulphate Glauber’s salt, Sulphate of soda

This inorganic salt is found in the intercellular fluids, and its principal office is toregulate the water in the tissue, blood and fluids of the body. Sodium sulphate regulates theamount by having the power to eliminate any excess that may, from any cause, be present. Onemolecule of sodium sulphate has the power to take up and carry out of the organism twomolecules of water. So sodium sulphate must be present in proper quantity in the body. Adeficiency of this salt prevents the elimination of such water from the tissue as is produced byoxidation of organic matter (while sodium chloride properly distributes the water in tissue, as has been shown) and thus will arise a hydrogenoid condition.

Biochemistry has established the fact that chills and fever (or ague), cholera, yellowfever and all ailments incident to hot weather, are caused by an excess of water in theblood, and probably in intercellular fluids: and that all such conditions arise from theinability of the digestion and assimilation to furnish sufficient quantity of sodiumsulphate to carry off the excess of water breathed into the blood through the lungs.

When the blood becomes overcharged with water, of course, the various tissues of thebody must suffer from lack of proper nourishment. This sets up a panic. Now, as thewater-carriers are not present in sufficient quantities to throw out the excess in the natural way, nature does the next best thing — causes a spasm of the vascular, nervousand muscular systems, and thus, by violent effort, throws out the excess of water; hencethe profuse perspiration which follows the chill. Where Natr. sulph. is not given tosupply the workmen, and thus keep out an excess of water, the chill will recur in aboutfortyeight hours, simply because that much time is required to again overcharge theblood with water.

So we find that among the inorganic salt-workmen in the human economy, sodium
sulphate works with water, keeps bile and pancreatic juice at normal consistency,
regulates the supply of water in intercellular fluid, and eliminates the excess of water
from the blood, when present in proper quantity.

In biochemic system of medicne Sodium Sulphate (Nat Sulph) is considered as “The
Elimination Salt”

The three natrum salts work in the body as follows,

Natrum Phos creates the water by splitting up of lactic acid; Nat Mur distributes the
water through the system. Nat. Sulph. regulates the quantity of water in the organism.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1. Complaints that are brought on by living in damp houses, basements and cellars and in rainy season.

2. Complaints are worse in wet weather; correspond to the hydrogenoid constitution and sycotic dyscrasia, constitutional conditions in children that result in chest catarrhs and asthmatic complaints.

3. The chief characteristic is a dirty greenish-gray or greenish-brown coating on the root of the tongue indicating an excess of bile (while a white or gray coating denotes a deficiency of bile, and requires Kali mur.).

4. Biliousness, caused from the liver secreting an excess of bile. Bitter taste in mouth. Mouth full of slime. Bilious vomiting. Bilious diarrhoea.

. Loose morning stool

. Aggravation from lying on the left side.

. Feels discouraged and despondent; worse in the morning and in damp weather.

. Greenish purulent discharge

. Modalities : All symptoms are worse in the morning and in damp, rainy weather;

feels better in dry, warm atmosphere. Complaints from living in damp buildings, basements, etc., or from eating water-plants, fish, etc. Symptoms aggravated by the use of water in any form. Conditions which tend to increase the water in the system, such as living in low, marshy places, “ague districts “ will cause a. molecular disturbance of Natr. sulph.

CLINICAL USE

It has been useful in treating the following conditionsm when the above

characteristic indications are present.

e Asthma and other respiratory infections

© Liver diseases including jaundice

© Gallbladder disorders

* Diabetes

¢ Head injuries — Never well since, suicidal depression after

e Dropsy

e Warts

e Headache

¢ Diarrhoea

e Diabetes

© Gout

© Uric acid diathesis

¢ Influenza,intermittent fever and ague

© Gravel, sand in urine

° Fig warts

° Vomiting in pregnancy

OMNIA


SILICEA

Synonym : Common Names:
Silica Silicious earth, pure flint or quartz

Silicea is found in the hair, nails, skin, periosteum, neurilemma (nerve sheath), and a trace in the bone _ tissue. This salt is
indicated in all suppurative processes until the infiltrated parts have fully discharged
the accumulation of decaying organic matter that may have arrived at a given point during nature’s effort to eliminate it
from the system. In the first stage of any swelling, Ferr. phos. and Kali mur. should be
given, but should these salts fail to abort the process, Silicea should at once be given. The
theory is, that the particles of silica, being sharp-cornered, accumulate under the
intelligent operations of nature’s law of affinity or attraction and act as a lancet,
thus cutting a way through the tissue, skin, etc., for the escape of the non-
functional organic matter. But in order to carry on any work, nature must have
tools to work with. When silica is present in proper quantities, the process of
suppuration is carried on in a normal manner. When a deficiency of silica occurs,
suppuration is retarded; the greater the deficiency, the greater and more stubborn and
painful the swelling or part at which the matter is attempting to escape.

A deficiency of silica in the connective tissue between the cerebrum and cerebellum
produces a mental condition in which thinking is difficult. By supplying silica in
molecular form, the chemical affinity is restored and normal thought again established.

Silicea has also the power to reabsorb a bloody or sero-albuminous exudate, existing
within the tissues by means of the lymphatics. Here it often follows Calc. phos.

Silicea cures chronic gouty rheumatic affections by means of its stimulating effects of
the involved connective tissue cells, compelling these to throw off the accumulated urates
through the lymphatics.

Silicea can restore suppressed foot-sweats, and in this way be an indirect remedy for
diseases resulting from suppression of foot-sweat, for instance: amblyopia, cataract,
paralyses, etc.

If the cells of any part of the connective tissue show a lack of Silicia molecules, they
atrophy in consequence.

Its action is deep and long-lasting.

CHARACTERISTIC INDICATIONS

1.It is especially suited to imperfectly nourished constitutions, owing to deficient assimilation and corresponds to the scrofulous diathesis.

.  Silica “For Lack of Grit — Physical or mental”. Silica provides the “grit” of mostliving things. It is indicated by those who need more       stamina, especially when malnutrition is present. Lack of stamina — mental, physical. Weakened and exhausted states — exhausted after a few        hours, to regain energy after surgery. Lack of self-confidence coming from sense of weakness and lack of courage.
.  Sensitive to cold. Wants to wrap up warm. Lack of body warmth — desire warmth, <cold and cold wind

. The characteristic discharge of silicea is thick, yellow, and offensive. It is the biochemic remedy for offensive discharges.

. Excessive offensive perspiration of feet, arm pits and back of neck. Offensive foot

. sweat with cold feet. Diseases resulting from suppression of foot-sweat, for instance: amblyopia, cataract, paralyses, etc.

. Milk intolerant, even of mother’s milk

. Silica is indicated wherever there is pus formation or threatened suppuration, e.g.
abscesses, boils, gumboils, styes, etc. It is useful in the treatment of tonsillitis when pus has begun to form.

 Skin

 It is the remedy for ailments attended with pus-formation, and is closely related
to all fistulous burrowings. Wherever pus is formed in an inflamed part of connective tissue or skin, Silicea may be used.
Like Cal. sulph, Silicea corresponds to the process of suppuration, with the following distinguishing features: Silicea ripens abscess, since it promotes suppuration. Calc. sulph, by restraining the suppurative process, heals
suppurating wounds. As long as infiltration, which can only disappear by suppuration, lasts, Silicea is the remedy, and should be continued until all the infiltrated parts have disappeared. If then the wound fails to heal, give Calc. sulph.
.Skin heals slowly and suppurates easily after injuries.
.Inflammation of, or injuries to, the skin, at that stage when thick, yellow pus is being discharged.
. Carbuncles, boils, ulcers, felons, etc., if deep-seated and discharging thick,heavy, yellow pus.
. Tendency to boils in any part of the body, especially in the springtime.
. Ulcers around nails, with unhealthy-looking skin.
. Pustules on face and neck; extremely painful.
 Leprosy, for the nasal ulceration, nodes and coppery spots.



9. Tissues

Abscess, easily bleeding after matter has begun to form, chief remedy, to promote the discharge of pus {Kali mur., before matter forms).

Swellings of the glands (if Kali mur. does not abort them and matter has
formed).

Suppurating glands, with thick, yellow, offensive discharge of matter.Scrofulous, enlarged glands.
Neglected cases of injury, with suppuration. Ulceration and caries of bone.

. Modalities : Symptoms are always worse at night and during full moon, in the open air. Worse from suppressed foot sweat or chilling of the feet. Better by heat and in warm room.

CLINICAL USE

Silicea is useful in the following diseases or conditions, where the above general
conditions are present :

Chronic and acute suppurations and ulcerations

Fistula, boils, carbuncles, tonsillitis, glandular swellings, whitlows, indurations,
scrofula, styes on eyelids, caries and necrosis of the bones, gum-boils on the jaw,
abscess of the labia, with tendency to fistulous openings, fistulous ulcers of the
breast, lachrymal fistula, suppurative otitis media, ulcerations of the throat with
thick, yellow discharge

Diseases resulting from suppressed foot sweats
Constipation

Fetid foot-sweat

Ozena

Chronic cough and cold

Glandular swellings which become hard and threaten to suppurate
Epilepsy especially nocturnal and change of moon Rheumatism

Gouty deposits.

Chronic dyspepsia

Skin unhealthy and easily suppurates

Nails dry and brittle

Falling of hair

Atrophy of parts

Headache

Silicea

EE

Hip joint disease

Running sores

Indurations

Premature babies - babies with large heads and thin bodies, frail, delicate skin
Developmental delays in speech, walking, and growth Vaccine induced developmental delays
Ear, sinus, and respiratory infections Dissolves boils, cysts, keloid scars, and abscesses, dental abscesses
Remedy for removing foreign objects from the body, skin — splinters, gunshot,glass
Hardening of glands and tumors Warts, especially hard warts Strong affinity for nails: strengthens nails, ingrown nails, nails with white spots,
ridges, brittle Strengthens hair and skin Strengthens bones, bone joints, scoliosis, and necrosis of bones Goitre
Sweating of the head in children, with swollen abdomen and foetid, Veary  offensive stools.

Leucorrhoea

Metrorrhagia
Quick reference to Biochemic Medicines
Name of the Sphere of action Main functions Main clinical Biochemic indications
Medicine
01. Calcarea Fluor e Bones Maintains the elastic] 1. Stony hard swelling
e Teeth fibres of any portion of anywhere in the body.

Concer (eat)
June 1) - Tuly 22,

Miasm: psova,
Poora- Syphititic

Lung ; chest,
Breast , cf,
Pericardium,

ftard Bone
Gnd Tumors,
Cardiac \ssve,

Hosmonal \ssue

e Vascular walls
e Skin

the vessels of the
connective tissue or of
the lymphatic system.

. Dilatation of the blood

. Enamal of the teeth

. Hemorrhoids

. All displacements of the |

. Lumbago from strains.

. Chapped hands or lips

vessels - vascular
tumours, aneurism,
enlargement, hypertrophy of heart,
varicose ulcer.

rough and deficient.
Unnatural looseness of the teeth with or without pain.
with itching accompanied with pain in back and constipation. Fissure of the anus, fistulous ulcers, when secreting thick, yellow pus. 
uterus. Uterus flabby, or very hard, like stone. Hard lump in the breast.

Chronic cases of  lumbago; aggravation on 
beginning to move and  amelioration by continued motion. Inflammation of knee joint, chronic synovitis. Cracking in the joints.
from cold. Skin hard, thickened and horny; Cracks in the palms of the hands.
loz. Cal. Phos

T Capricorn («ar )
MIRSm: Syeoin's
 Bones, Teeth
Blood plasma and Corpuscles
@ Saliva
© Gastric Juice etc.

1, Absolutely essential to the proper growth and nutrition of the body.
2. It gives solidity to the bones.
3. Defective nutrition esp.
4. Backwardness

in children with delayed growth and development.more particularly where there Biochemic System of Medicine


osteoarthntt Si
Non healing
Useer ,
Gangrene»
Pronchictams,
A)zhei mer,
Cerebral Avvophy
Coll agen dkseme
Sen Arsene
eke

?

Name of the Sphere of action Main functions Main clinical
Biochemic indications
Medicine hnemia é is bone weakness or recurring tooth troubles.

. Tardy formation of callus around the ends of fractured bones. Helps to unite fractured bones.

. The tissue salt for anemia.

. Restores power in acute diseases. A real tonic in chronic wasting diseases.
In anemia of young, rapidly growing people; in women weakened by rapid child-bearing,
prolonged suckling or excessive menstruation or leucorrhea; in accompanying diseases with exhaustive discharges, it acts curatively.
. In old age, where the regenerative function decreases in the nervous tissue.
. Cal. Sulph Seorpro Ee) Oe 24 -2| Nov water, Fr'x Mjasm | SyouS, Sypmsis Gert organ, pelvis, Fissure]
Prostrate , Uvethri HS e Skin e@ Mucous Membrane Controls suppuration.

. Third stage of ll suppurative process when the discharge is thick, yellow, purulent and sometimes tinged with blood.
~In all cases of
suppuration, when the discharge continues too long and the sore is unhealthy.
. Symptoms are aggravated by getting wet or by washing and working in water;
overheated; warmth and are better in a warm, dry atmosphere.
 Follows Silicea well, and will cause the wound to

Name of the Sphere of action Main functions Main clinical Biochemic indications
Medicine
_
heal. While _ silica hastens the process of
suppuration in a normal manner, Calc. sulph.
closes up the process at the proper time .
04, Ferrum Phos Blood It acts as  oxygen| 1. In the beginning of types . carrier. of inflamatory conditions |__Pr stes (faa) hence it is considered as Feb\9- May 20 “Inflammation Remedy”. Miasm, Syoosis In the first stage of ——— all febrile disturbances
Qovt , Ear and in inflammatory and inbe chon , Let} congestive Sees
~ ' especially fore Eye infechion » exudation.

Virah infection Sexssonal problem, Sele iSsues, Syur, Tumor

. It a first aid remedy for
. Especially effective in

All inflammatory conditions of the respiratory tract, in the
first stage, for the fever, heat and pain.

haemorrhages from any orifice of the body. anemic people.

05. Kali Mur May 21- June 20 “Geminu ») Airg Sign, Dusk Miasm + psova , psera-Sycohic peer
Showder 7 Hawds Nervour System, eo prvadion , Aust Dpwn Syndyrom, Stammeing ' Bronthihs-
Asthma ete.

 Skin
Serous membrane

It is chemically related to fibrin. Disturbances in its molecular action cause white fibrinous exudations the cardinalindications of Kali m.
. Second stage of inflammation of serous membrane when the
. The great keynote of exudation is of a plastic or fibrinnous character.
.Kali-m. is, whiteness.
Whiteness of secretions, exudations, eruptions of tissues The principal general characteristic
symptoms are a white or grey coating at the base of the tongue, white or grey exudations,
glandular swellings, discharges or expectoration of a thick, white fibrinous slime or
Biochemic System of Medicine

Name of the Biochemic
Medicine
Sphere of action
Main functions
Main clinical
indications
phlegm from any mucous surface, or flour-like scaling of the skin.

Toughness - Fibrinous exudations and discharges.

. All stomach and bowel symptoms are worse after eating fats, pastry or any rich food.
. The symptoms are worse by motion, and worse by any fatty or rich food or pastry. Worse by warmth of bed.
. Kali Phos e Brain It controls brain 
| 1. The state of worn out © Nerves function. mothers, over-worked business people, or
L (m ch wi e@ Muscles anyone who has endured ar = Blood an intense physical/ 2 mental strain that has
Apred 19) drained their system. Aries -Ga 2, Sleeplessness from t nervous causes, often Fiery Element, after worry or excitement.
Moveable, 
 Modalities :lies General modalities -
Miasm:. Psoxa, Better from _rest,tas i Psro -Syphuutie . nourishment and heat.
Symptoms are generally id e presenk 3 aggravated by noise,
7 exertion — both mental Head, Brain, and physical, excitement, Eye JE, BP. Worry, arising from a
migraine ,ASD, sitting position, ete. Autism, boils, oe et
Chore micah gue] motion, eating, excitement
Venrt'go,Fever, or pleasant company;
Maningioma worse when alone. jand other heat © Pains worse by cold air,
renkated diSordey| continued exercise and c after rest.

Name of the Sphere of action Main functions Main clinical Biochemic indications
Medicine

07. Kali sulph

23 Aug - 22 Set
_vir g® (wan)
Mifsm: psora,
Syeesis
Tntestine, Loewen
Abdorninad ,
Blewd puri ficabon
Perspivah on Sin,

Epidermis and epithelial cells

It plays an important role as the carrier of oxygen.

1. Applicable to the third
2. All
3. Profuse desquamation of
4, Wandering pains
5. Hot flashes and < heat
6. All ailments are worse in stage of inflammmation,
  discharges are yellow, yellow stools, yellow diarrhoea, yellow slimy tongue.
  sometimes thick yellow

epidermis; with a discharge. and night
a warm room and toward evening and better in cool, open air.

23 July -22 August
Leo (fez)
Midsm% psora , SyCoays
Heart, Circulation,

@ Nerves

@ Muscles

@ Stomach

e Respiratory system the of

It controls contractive power nerves and muscles.
1. The true antispasmodic
2. It corresponds to pains

remedy and considered it as “The Pain Cell Salt”. of all kinds with the . exception of burning
Spine, Blood pains. Pains which are Pressure and darting, spasmodic, in character, and are}
Ober Cardiac A relieved by warmth and Tssue. 
7 pressure. 
8. The Mag Phos condition
9.is aggravated by cold and by touching and are relieved by the application of heat, by pressure and by bending double.

09. Nat. Mur. Every body cells as well| It balances bodily fluid 1, Complaints often
Aquariow> (34) | as the blood induced by grief.
Tan 21 - Febig Exhaustion from  as mental overload.
fies eSycos as 2. Highly sensitive people
Psyeo— Sypalihe who have walled off their emotions.
8. Constipation
Biochemic System of Medicine
Moby Nuvon
bisee » Tumors}
Guoblastem™a ,
Tnteshne

Cos ruenen
Name of the Sphere of action Main functions Main clinical Biochemic indications
Medicine
L + |
Cyamps by 4. Headaches, hammering Al oh eimer’S, sensation, worse and

5. Excessive
6. Water retention before
7. Difficulty in urinating,
8. Hay fever with great brought on by being in the sun.
9.thirst with dryness of skin, eyes, and throughout the body. menses. esp. in public bathrooms. sneezing and nasal discharge like egg white.
10. Nat. Phos Sep 23 - 04 22 libra (gan) wind pmovable missm + psor%s, Sees Acid Bane Ration] Kideney 474 Lower Ba, Worm , BDiabehs!
Renal stone ,peop etc.
@ GI tract
@ Blood,
e@ Muscles,
@ Nerve and brain cells

It controls acid balance in the body.
. Moist,
. It helps people who
Indicated for excess of acid in the body characterized generally by “sourness,”. It
relieves sour eructations or belching, or sour vomiting, or sour

diarrhoea;

creamy or | golden-yellow coating
at the back part of | the tongue. |

cannot eat acidic foods (oranges,
Srapefruit, kiwi. ete.) acidic high protein
diets, and coffee drinkers.
11. Nat. Sulph  20 Apri )—May 20 TAURUS (9S )

e Respiratory system’
@ GI system

Sodium sulphate
regulates the amount water in the body by having the power to eliminate any excess dyscrasia.
Earth Element, that may, from any] 5 Dirty nish-gray or
a “ i * 4 cause, be present, vnish-brown — coatii
[Fix S1gn - Hence it is considered paaprinaese of the sotigiase
Mm asm: S YCOUS as “The Elimination on . . [ Salt”

- Complaints are worse in
wet weather; correspond to the — hydrogenoid constitution and sycotic
Name of the Sphere of action Main functions Main clinical
Biochemic indications

Medicine 4
Mouth, Face, 3. Biliousness. Bitter taste

 in mouth. Mouth full of Neck) Throat, slime. Bilious vomiting,
Thyroid, Voeak Bilious diarrhoea. Cord, cakyact / 4. Loose morning stool.
phar y rans ete! 5..Greenish purulent discharge
. Aggravation from lying on the left side.
. Modalities: All symptoms are worse in the morning and in damp, rainy weather,
feels better in dry, warm atmosphere etc.
12. Silica e Skin Promotes suppuration.| 1. Suited to imperfectly
When silica is present in nourished constitutions, 22 Nov- 2) Pee | © BonesSagttari oun (a)
Miacm ; Syeosi sa.
Bewgn Tumor,
Gnstipatien ,
Threat infecheon |
liver Disorder,
Hy pertipidems
ete

@ Hair and nails.

proper quantities, the process of suppuration is carried on in a
normal manner. When a deficiency of silica occurs, suppuration is retarded.
and scrofulous diathesis. |
2. Lack of stamina -| mental, physical. Weak- |
ened and _ exhausted | states |
3. Chilly patient |
4. Discharge - thick, yellow, and offensive
5. Excessive offensive |
Perspiration of feet, arm |
pits and back of neck.
Offensive foot sweat |
with cold feet. |
6. Milk intolerant, even of | mother’s milk
7. Silica is _ indicated wherever there is pus
formation or threatened suppuration, eg:
abscesses, boils, gumboils, styes, etc.
8. Constipated patient.


Biochemic System of Medicine
BipeneMmie SYSTEM OT MCCS es

Difference between Homoeopathy & Biochemic System of Medicine

Homeopathy Biochemic System of
Medicine
1. Basis of It is a method of treatmen based on the law of | It is a method of treatment prescription similars; i.e. Similia Similibus Curentur. based on the law of deficiency of tissue sets,
2. Discovery This system was discovered by Dr. Samuel | This system was discovered by Hahnemann in 1790. Dr. William Schusseler in 1873.
3. Sources of Medicines are prepared from different sources. | All medicine prepared from
medicine — vegetable kingdom, animal kingdom, | Mineral kingdom.
mineral kingdom, sarcodes, nosode and imponderabilia.
4, Number of Numbers of medicines are more than 3000 | Numbers of medicines are only medicines and increasing day by day. 12 & fixed.
5. Scale of Medicines are prepared by all the three scales | Medicines are prepared only by
preparation of ~i.e. decimal, centesimal, 50-millesimal. decimal scale. medicines
6. Sources of Drug provings on healthy human beings is the | Remedies are given on the basis
knowledge of main source of knowledge of medicines. | of chemico-physiological action
medicines ef the inorganic salt on the human organism.
7. Polypharmacy Monopharmacy is the rule of practice. | Polypharmacy is allowed.
versus Polypharmacy is not allowed. = monopharmacy
8. Repetition Frequent repetition is not allowed and single | Frequent repetition is allowed.
dose is to be given.

Only similarity potentized medicines are used in both the method of treatment,
otherwise Homoeopathy and Biochemic System of Medicines are different.

Aconite of chronic diseases (Alumina) As Aconite is frequently used in acute diseases,
similarly Alumina is frequently used in chronic diseases.

Aconite of the venous capillary system (Ham.v.) Hamamelis. V. acts upon venous system
of blood vessels as Aconite on the arteries (Ref. W; H. Burt - Physiological Materia
Medica).

Acute idiocy (Hell. N.) Utter foolishness or extreme mental inability.

African fever (Terebinth.) i.e. Black Water fever. A haemoglobinurie or malignant malaria
in which more than half of the circulating R.B.C. are haemolysed, characterised by the
passage of dark red or black urine.

After pains (Actaea, Caulo, Sabina, Sec. c.) Painful cramplike contractions of the uterus
occurring after childbirth.

Alae nasi (Ant. T. Brom. Lye. Medo) The wing of the nostril.
Alcoholic beverages (Ranunculus) Drinking liquor.
All gone (Anac, Puls, Sep.) Empty. Amaurosis (Tab) Partial or total blindness.

Amblyopia (Ruta) Dimness of vision, partial loss of sight without discoverable lesion in eye
structures or optic nerve.

American sick headache (Lac D., Sang.) Periodic hemicrania(Migrain).

Amiable ([gn.) Having a pleasant or friendly disposition.

Amorous (Ver. A) Inclined to love.

Anaesthetic vapors (Acetic Acid) Chloroform, Ethylene, Nitrous Oxide (N,O,) ete.
producing insensibility.

Analogue (Merc., Phyt., Plat., Eup.) Similar or parallel.

Anasarea (Apis, Ars. A., Dulc., Terebinth) A generalised infiltration of fluid into
subcutaneous connective tissue.

Aneurism (Fluor. A.) Local dilatation of a blood vessel, usually artery, due to local fault in
the wall through defect, disease or injury.

Angry ulcers (Phyt.) Inflammed & Painful ulcers.
Anguish (Ars. A., Hell. N.) Severe bodily or mental pain.
Anteversion (Lil.T.) Turning forward, denoting a malposition of this sort of the uterus.

Anthrax (Taran) A contagious disease of cattle, which may be trans; mitted to man by
inoculation, inhalation, and ingestion, causing malig-nant pustules.

Antitoxin (Variolinum) An agent which neutralizes a given toxin.

Apathetic (Cinch., Staph., Syph., Plumb.) Insensible to emotion, indifferent.

Apoplexy (Arn. M., Asterius, Cact. Crot. H.Ver. V.) A sudden loss of consciousness followed
by paralysis, due to cerebral haemorrhage.

Apparent relish (Cicuta V.) Seeming enjoyment.

Aphthae (Borax, Sul. A.) Small white spots on the mucous membrane of the mouth seen in
thrush, sprue, or with Vincents’ infection.

Ardent character (Nux V.) Eager, zealous, enthusiastic.

Aromatic medicine (Nux V.) 1. Having an agreeable, somewhat pungent, spicy odour.
 2.One of a group of vegetable drugs having a fragrant odour and slightly stimulant properties,

Arrogant (Plat.) Haughty.

Articulation difficult (Pyr.) Speech difficult.

Asiatic cholera (Cup.) An acute epidemic infectious disease caused by

a specific germ, vibreo cholerae. It is marked clinically by a profuse

watery diarrhoea, muscular cramps, vomiting and collapse.

Asphyxia neonatorum (Ant. T.) Asphyxia occurring in the new born.
Asthenic condition (Ledum, Mur. A.) Lack or loss of bodily strength, weak.

Asthenopia (Ruta)
1. Weak sight, eye strain.
2. A marked tendency for visual recognition to fade rapidly.

Atrocious (Spig, Taren) Very bad.

Back ‘gives out’ (Aesc. H.) Weakness or exhaustion of back bone.

Balm of Gilead (Con. M.) Gilead Region of ancient Palestine known for its balm. Balm of
Gilead (also Balm of Mecca) : A gold coloured Oleo-resin exudate from the tree,
Balsamodendron Gileadense, once esteemed as an antiseptic & vulnerary. In ancient time
as ‘Balm of Gilead’ was thought to be a panacea for all types of wounds, similarly conium
M. is esteemed as panacea for the sufferings of old maids and old bachelors (Ref. the Bible
J. E. R. 8-22).

Basilar meningitis (Tub., Ver. V) Meningitis at the base of the brain, due usually to
tuberculosis.

Bellies of the muscles (Actea) The prominent thick central part of a muscle.

Beseeching (Stram) Asking somebody earnestly, Entreating or appealing for something.
Besotted (Bapt.) Confused.


ALLEN'S KEY NOTE #'gif easy -axplanation 709

Bilious attack Gsdacudus, H., Bry, Podo) Denoting a somewhat non descript congestive
disturbance with ariorexia, coated tongue, constipation, headache, dizziness, pasty
complexion, and A rasell blight jaundice; assumed to result from hepatic dysfunction.

Bilious constitut eli) One marked by more or less general pigmentation, high blood
pressure, slow ‘piilse, well developed muscles, strong appetite.

Bilious Fever (Aijpet.y Wialarial haemoglobinuria or black water fever.

Blisters (Anthrax}*Ségatation of the epidermis from the dermis by a collection of fluid,
usually serum’ of blood:
Blonde (Brom., Chek, Ni, A, Sel, Tub.) Light coloured, flaxen; fair. Woman having such hair

and skin. gs!

Blond hair (Cale: pst.) Tight coloured hair.
Blushing (Amyléniiaa, 1;
Blur or film (PAgéhigatistinct or thin coating.

Book-worms (Cécc.

er. M.) Become red in the face with shame or other emotion.

ersons devoted to reading.

Borborygmus (Cinch) Rumbling or gurgling noises, produced by movement of gas in the
alimentary canal; audible at a distance.

Boyish go (Aur.

Bran-like (Tub.) bike hiisk of grains.

Breeds vermin {Afez) Bréeds parasitic insect.

Brusies (Am. M., Sulph. A) Contusion usually producing a hematoma without rupture of the
skin.

Brunette (Nit. A., Fub:) Dark skinned and dark brown or black haired woman.

Bubo (Merc. S.):, Enlargement of lymphatic glands, especially in the groin. A feature of soft
sore (Chancroid) lymphogranuloma inguinale and plague.

Bunions (Hyp, Rhod, 6) .~Hallux Valgus. A deformity on the head of the metatarsal bone
at its junction ‘with '' the great toe. Friction and pressure of shoes at this point cause a
bursa to develop. The prominent bone, with its bursa, is known as a bunion.

C

Cachectic people (Bar: C., Hydr, Nit, Ac. Sec. C., Card. V., Nat. M.) People having a general
lack of nutrition and wasting, occurring in the. course of a chronic disease.

Cachexia (Eupat, lod.) A term denoting a state of constitutional disorder, malnutrition and
general ill health. The chief signs of this condition are bodily emaciation, sallow
unhealthy skin and heavy lustureless eyes.

Calamity (Lil. T.) Any extreme misfortune bringing great loss and sorrow.



710 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Calisthenies (Brotn.) The practice of various exercises (the use of dumb-bells, Indian clubs
etc.) with the object of preserving health and increasing physical strength.

Callous (Calc. Ph., Symph) The partly calcified tissue which forms about the ends of a broken
bone, which ultimately accomplishes repair of the fracture.

Calvarium (Cannabis. I.) The vault of the skull; the skull-cap.
Cannine hunger (Cina) Ravenous hunger. Canine means like or relating to dogs.
Canker sores (Ant. Cr.) Obsolete term for aphthous stomatitis.

Canthus (Borax) The angle formed by the junction of the eyelids: The inner one is known as
the ‘nasal canthus’ and the outer as the temporal canthus.

Cardiac asthenia (Pyr.) Weakness of heart.
Cardialgia (Bism.) Literally pain in the heart or pit of Stomach. Often used for heart burn.

Cataleptic condition (Graph, Sabad.) A condition of waxy rigidity of limbs induced by
severe mental shock, fear, mirth, anger or surprise.

Catamenia (Borax, Glon.) Menses.
Catarrhal laryngitis (All. C.) Acute congestive laryngitis with excessive secretion.

Cauterizing (Arg. N., Nat. M.) Application of an agent for scarring or burning the skin or
tissues by means of heat or chemicals.

Caynne pepper (Cap.) Red pepper.
Celibacy (Con.) Unmarried life.
Chafing (Sulph. A) Cracked & open fissure of the skin.

Chargin (Bry, Cham, Colo, Plat, Mur. A, Phos. A. Rhus, Staph) Acute vexation or
mortification.

Chalazae (Staph, Thuja) A small tubercle; a sty.

Chamomile tea (Cinch.) Tea prepared with infusion of the flowers of Matricarea
Chamomilla.

Chancres (Lac. C. Merc sol.) Primary lesion; the first manifestation of syphilis. It begins as
a papule on area of infiltration, of dull red color, hard and insensitive; the centre usually
becomes eroded or breaks down into an ulcer.

Chancroids (Merc. S.) Type of veneral disease prevalent in warmer climates. Also called ‘soft
sore’, causes multiple, painful, ragged ulcers on the penis and vulva, often associated with
bubo formation.

Changeable humour (Nux M.) Changable mood.

Chapped hands (Petr.) The skin of hands is dry, scaly and fissured; a type of eczema.
Charpie ((Mez) Light Indian bed-stead.

Chatters (Hyos) Talks incessantly.

Cheesy bottom (Merc. S.) Bottom of ulcer looking like cheese.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 711

Chemical analogue (Dulc.) One medicine of vegetable kingdom becomes similar or parallel
to another medicine of mineral (chemical) kingdom.

Chilblains (Abrot, Agar, Petr, Zinc.) Inflammation, itching and swelling of the feet, toes or
fingers caused by mild frostbite or damp weather.

Chlorosis (Calc. os, Cycl, Puts) A form of hypochromic microcytic (iron deficiency) anaemia,
characterized by a great reduction in haemoglobin. The condition is observed chiefly in
girls, from puberty to the 3rd decade.

Chlorotic (Fer. M.,.Phos.) A person suffering from Chlorosis.

Cholera infantum (Podo) A disease of infant characterized by vomiting, profuse watery
diarrhoea, fever, great prostration and collapse.

Cholera Morbus (Ani. T., Bis., Cup., Sec. C., Ver-A.) An acute gastroenteritis, marked by
severe colic, vomiting and watery stools, occurring in hot weather.

Choleric temperament (Coff, Lack, Phos. A.) One marked by more or less general
pigmentation, high blood pressure, slow pulse, well developed muscle, strong appetites,
tenacity of purpose.

Chorea (Actaea, Caulo, Croc, Stram, Zin.) Disease manifested by irregular and spasmodic
movements, beyond the patient’s control. Even, voluntary movements are rendered jerky
and ungainly.

Choreic convulsions (Cicutd) Convulsions of the nature of chorea. Chorea is a disorder
characterised by irregular, spasmodic, involuntary movements of the limbs or facial
muscles.

Chromic blue condition (Lac. C.) Always depressed and gloomy.
Chubby (Kali Bi) Round & Plump.

Cicatrices (Caust, Fl. A., Graph, Sul. A.) Scar; fibrous tissue replacing the normal tissues
during the process of healing.

Cider vinegar (Acet. A., Carb. A.) Fermented vinegar.

Ciliary neuralgia (Actaea.) Pain of a severe, throbbing character in the . course of
distribution of a nerve supplying eye.

Clammy perspiration (Ver. V.) Sticky perspiration.

Clavus (Nat, M.) A severe pain in the head, sharply limited in area, as if caused by the
driving of a nail.

Clergyman’s sore throat (Arum. T., Dros.) Sore throat of religious preacher.

Climacteric (Con., Lack, Plum, Psor, Sab, Sang, Sep, Sulph, Sul-A, Trillia) A critical period
of life, occurring in women at the termination of the reproductive period, and
characterized by endocrine, somatic antf . psychic changes and ultimate menopause.

Clinkers (Kali. Bi.) Hard mass.

Clonic spasms (Cup, Plum.,) Repetitive muscular contraction.


712 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Cloudy urine (Lys.) Smoky urine.

Coalescing (Hepar.) Comeing together and forming one whole.
Cobweb (Brom, Graph.) Spider’s network, material of it, thread of this.
Colliquative Sweats (Phos. A.): Excessive sweats.

Commotion (Spig.) Physical or mental disturbance.

Concussion (Am. M.) A condition arising from a violent jar or shock.

Condylomata (Nit. A. Sab., Thuj.) A wart like excrescence at the anus or vulva, or on the
glans penis. Condylomata lata found as a manifestation of late secondary syphilis.

Confinement (Pyr., Ruta) Lying-in; giving birth to a child.

Constitution iTTie physical make-up of the body, including the mode of performance of its
functions, the activity of its metabolic processes, the manner and degree of its reaction to
stimuli and its power of resistance to the attack of Pathogenic organisms.

Consumptive (Fer. M.) Sufferer from a wasting of the tissues of the body, usually in
tuberculosis.

Contemptuous (Plat.) One who looks down upon other.

Contusions (Arn. M., Euph, Ham.) A bruise; slight bleeding into tissues whilst the skin
remains unbroken.

Convalescence (Calc. Os.) A period between the end of a disease and the patient’s
restoration to complete health.

Convulsive gagging (Bism.) Spasmodic type of suffocation.
Coppery hue (Merc.) Coppery colour or coppery tint.

Corpse like (Plum) Pale, like dead person.

Corpulent (Aur. M., Op., Calc, Os., Lobelia) Bulky (of body); fat.

Corns (Ant C., Hyp, Thuj) A cone-shaped, overgrowth and hardening ef epidermis, with the
point of the cone in the deeper layers; produced by friction or pressure.

Countenance (Acon., sec. c.) Expression on face.

Crazy (Aeon., Actaea.) Insane.

Crib (Bar.) Cradle.

Criencephalique (Hell, N.) Cerebral cry found in Meningitis.
Cross (Nat. M. Cham., Aesc. H.) Annoyed.

Croup (Ars. A., Kali, Bi.) Laryngeal obstruction croupy breathing in a child is often called
‘Stridulous’ meaning noisy or harsh-sounding.

Crowing inspiration (Ambra) Inspiratory sound resembling loud cry of a cock.

Crumbling at verge of anus (Ammon. M., Mag. M,, Nat. M.) Broken out into pieces at the
opening of anus.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation __ 713

Cyanosis (Carb An.) A bluish tinge manifested by hypoxic tissue, observed most frequently
under the nails, lips and skin. It is always due to lack of oxygen.

Culpability of the act (Phos. A.) Blameworthiness.

Darting pain (Kalm, Mag. P.) Pain moving suddenly and quickly.
Dashed to pieces (Coffea) Broken into pieces.

Death-rattle (Ant. T.) A respiratoy gargling or rattling in the throat of a dying person caused
by the loss of cough reflex and accumulation of mucus.
Debauch (Curb. V., Nux-M., Salen.)
1. Pervert from virtue,or morality.
2. Occasion of excessive drinking or immoral behaviour.

Decrepit (Sec. c.) Wasted or worn out with age and infirmity.

Decubitus (Bapt, Fl-Ac, Lack, Petr) The recumbent position; Decubitus ulcer-pressure sore
or Bed-sore.

Deleterious substance (Anth.) Noxious or injurious substance.
Delicate children (Benz. A.) Feeble, weak children.

Delirium (Bap, Bry, Plum, Sabad, Stram) A condition of extreme mental and usually motor
excitement marked by rapid succession of confused and unconnected ideas, often with
illusions and hallucinations.

Delirium Tremens (Can. I., Hyos,Op., Ranun.) Delirium resulting from alcoholic
intoxication.

Delusion (Plat) A false belief which can not be altered by argument or reasoning.

Despondent (Apis, Mez, Cinch, Tub} Having or Showing loss of hope; wretched.

Diaper (Lye) Napkin for baby.

Diathesis The Constitutional or inborn state disposing to a disease group of diseases, or
metabolic or structural anomaly.

Diphtheritic Croup (Brom) Same as membranous croup.

Diplopia (Syph.) Double vision, due Usually to weakness or paralysis of some of the ocular
muscles.

Dissecting wounds (Anth.) Wounds occurring during dissection.

Drawn Condition (Aeth.) Pulled out of shape of the face or distorted condition of face,
looking very tired or worried.

Drenching perspiration (Crot. H.) Profuse perspiration making wet all over body.

Dropsy (Apis, Apoc, Colch, Hell. N, Sul.) An excessive accumulation ; of clear watery fluid in
any of the tissues or cavities of the body.


xt Book of MATERIA MEDIC,
714 Tel A

4H rl em

. ‘ ally chill
Dumb ague (Gels) Subacute Malaria fever with irregular attack in hgaeieh may stage
is absent.

ic mat; i
Dyscrasia (Sulph. A.) A morbid general state resulting from the presence of toxic ters in

one 7 if i
the blood; an old-term to indicate an abnormal depraved condition, especially in the
humors.

Earthy Complexion (Berb. v.) : Muddy complexion.
Easy disposition (Sep.) Free from anxiety.

Ecchymosis (Led, Sec. c., Sul. A.) A purplish patch caused by extravasation of blood into the
skin.

Eclampsia (Meli) An attack of convulsions, the word is now almost entirely confined to that
associated with pregnancy.

Ecstasy (Lack.) A state of being extreme delight.

Eestatic love (Ant. c.) Exalted state of feeling about love affairs.

Eczema Solaris (Mur. A.) An eczematous eruption originating from sunburn.

Effulvia, Noxious (Crot. H.) See Noxious effulvia.

Embrace (Nat. C.) Sexual intercourse.

Emigrant (Plat.) Who goes from one’s own country to another to settle there.

Emission (Canth, Dig, Dios, Merc, Phos. A.): An involuntary ejaculation of semen.

Emphysema (Amman C.) Dilatation of the pulmonary air vesicles, usually through atrophy
of the septa between the alveoli.

Enema (Lac. D.) The injection of a liquid into the rectum, to be returned or retained.

Enervated by indolence and luxury (Helon) Weakened by indolence and luxury.

Enfeebled (Helon.) Weakened.

Engraving (Ruta) Inscribing ornaments etc.

Entreating (Stram.) Earnestly requesting.

Enuresis (Sec. C., Sep.) Involuntary passage of urine, usually occurring at night or during
sleep.

Enuresis diurna et nocturna

(Equiset.) Involuntary Passage of urine, day and night.
Epilepsy (Calc. Ars, Cic. v. Kali Br.,) Result from diso:

‘fit’ is caused by an abnormal electrical di,

rdered electrical activity of brain. The
activity) and usually results in loss of consci

ischarge that disturbs cerebration (mental
ousness,

Erethitic Chlorosis (Fer. M.) Anaemia with flushing.

Erratic (Lac. c.) Irregular or uneven in movement
Erysipelas (Anth, Calend, Rhus, Ruta) An

acute, ific i i i i i
is a spreading streptococcal inflammatio: rape rae Siasaies th ae

quality or behaviour,

n of the skin and subcutaneous tissues.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 715

Erysipelas Phlegmonas (Graph) Inflammatory condition of connec-tive tissue without pus
formation.

Erythema (Canth) Reddening of the skin.
Erythism (Sep, Sil) Redness.

Eustachian tube (Merc. D.)A canal, partly bony, partly cartilaginous, measuring 38.0 to
50.8 mm in length, connecting the pharynx with the tympanic cavity. It allows air to pass
into the middle ear, so that the air pressure is kept even on both sides of the eardrum.

Euthanasia (Amy 1. N.) A quiet, painless death.

Exanthema (Apis, Bry, Hell. N. Tereb) A general disease accompanied by an eruption on the
skin, such as measles, an eruptive fever.

Excruciating (Hypericum) Very severe.

Excrescences (Merc. S.) Abnormal growth.

Exhilarated (Med.) Enliven.

Exostosis (Ruta.) Bony tumour.

Extorting cries (Lac. D.) Causing cries.

Exuberent granulation (Nit. A., T.huj, Sab.) Excessive growth of granular tissue.

F

False Step (Spig.) Stumble.

Fatty degeneration (Aur. M., Lac. D.) Degeneration of tissues which results in appearance
of fatty droplets in the cytoplasm; found especially in diseases of Liver, Kidney and Heart.

Fauces (Kali. Bi) The opening from the mouth into the pharynx, bounded above by the soft
palate, below by the tongue, pillars of the fauces lie laterally and enclose the tonsil.

Felons (Anth, Taran, Dios.) Paronychia; i.e. Inflammation of the structures in the distal
phalanx of a finger or toe, either those surrounding the nail or the bone itself.

Femoral hernia (Plum.) Protrusion through the femoral canal along side the femoral blood
vessels as they pass into the thigh.

Fidgety (Apis., Graph, Med, Phos, zinc. M.) Spasmodic movement of the limbs.
Fidgety hands (Kali Br.) Nervous movement of hands.

Figwarts (Staph, Thuj.) A projecting growth on the external genitals or at the anus,
consisting of fibrous overgrowths covered by thickened., epithelium usually produced by
the irritating discharges in chronic, venereal disease.

Fingers “go to sleep” Numbness of the fingers.
Fish brine (Med, Sanic.) Fish socked insalt solution.

Fistula (Calc. P.) An abnormal communication between two body surfaces or cavities.


716 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Fistula dentalis (Fi. A.) A fistula leading down to the cavhy of an ‘ alveolar abscess (abscess
in a tooth socket).

Fistula lachrymalis (Fl. A., Sil.) A fistula opening into a tear duct or the lachrimal sac.
Fissures (Nit. A., Sulph.) A furrow, cleft or slit.

Fissures of anus((Rat.) A crack or slit in the mucous membrane of the anus.

Flakes (Ver. A.) A small loose mass.

Flaxen hair (Brom.) Yellowish brown colour of hair.

Flickering (Cyci) Light burning or shining unsteadily.

Florid (Glon, Lobel.) Bright red colour.

Fluttering (Lit. T) Vibrating rapidly and irregularly.

Follicular pharyngitis (Aesc. H.) A form of pharyngitis in which the lymphoid follicles are
enlarged, studding the mucous membrane as minute nodules or granules.

Fontanelles (Calc. o., Calc. p.) : A membranous space between the cranial bones. The
diamond-shaped anterior f. (bregma) is at the junction of the frontal and two parietal
bones. It ossifies during the second year of life. The triangular posterior f. (lambda) is at
the junction of the occipital and two parietal bones-it ossifies within a few weeks of birth.

Fossa navicularis (Petros.) The terminal dilated portion of the urethra in the glans penis.

Fraenum (Merc. S.) A fold of membrane which checks or limits the movement of an organ
e.g. Fraenum linguae-from the under surface of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. Here
fraenum of prepuce.

Freckles (Lach, Muriatic. A.) Yellowish or brownish macules developing on the exposed part
of the skin.

Frenzy (Mag. P.) Agitated State of extreme excitement.

Fretful (Ant. c, Psor, Tub.): Peevish; Irritable.

Frog Spawn (Hell-N.) Eggs of frog.

Frothy molasses (Ipecac) Bubbles due to fermentation of molasses (GUR).
Frowsy (Borax) Unclean in appearance.

Furuncle (Abrot, Merc. S.) A localised pyogenic infection originating in a hair follicle.

Gagging (Ipecac, Kali Bi, Lye., Podo.) Retching.

Gangrenous diphtheria (Merc. C.) Destructive diphtheria.
Gastralgia (Bism, Petr.) Stomach-ache.

Gastric headache (Tarax) Headache originated from gastric trouble.


Genuine collapse (Crotalus.) A state of extreme weakness with physical and mental
depression different from collapse due to sudden shock.

Glairy mucus (Ipec.) Mucoid, vicious resembling the white of an egg.
Gleet (Agnus, Petros, Sep.): A mucous discharge from the urethra in chronic gonorrhoea.

Globus hystericus (Lac — D.) A sensation as of a ball in the throat or as if the throat were
compressed, occurring in emotional attacks.

Gloomy, foreboding(Phos.) Depressed; Having presentiment, specially of evil.

Glued (Mez.) Pressed firmly together.

Gout Stones (Led.) Nodular swelling due to the deposition of sodium biurate in gouty person.
Gouty Concretion (Benz. A.) Gouty stones; Gouty nodes.

Gouty diathesis (Benz. A.) Constitutional predisposition to gout.

Granular conjunctivitis (Arg. N.) Granular lids; Trachoma.

Grasping a flocks (Hyos.) Trying to catch tuft of wools or cotton etc.

Grave to gay (Nux. M.) Serjousness to joyfulness.

_# |

Habitual abortion (Caulo) A condition in which a woman has had three or more
consecutive, spontaneous abortions.

Haemoptysis (Trill. Millef.) Coughing up of blood from lungs.

Haemorrhagic diathesis (Ammon C, Carb. V., Cinch, Crot. H., Croc. S., Ipec, Kreos., Phos.,
Sec. C.) The constitutional or inborn state disposing to haemorrhages from different
orifices of the body.

Hallucinations (Bell, Stram, Tub.) A subjective perception of what does not exist.

Hamstrings (Ammon. M,) Tendons bounding the popliteal space on either side; the inner
comprises the tendons of the semimembranosus, semitendinosus, graeilis and sartorius
muscles. Outer h. is the tendon of the biceps femoris.

Hangnail (Nat. M.) A loose tag of epidermis attached at the proximal portion in the medial
of lateral nail fold.

Hard thump (Aur. M.) Heavy stroke.

Hay fever (All. C., Psor., Tub.) Acute allergic condition caused by pollen, grass & flowering
shrubs.

Head strong (Nit. A., Sil.) Violently self-willed; obstinate.

Heart burn (Sulph. Ac.) Pyrosis i.e. the raising of small quantities of acid liquid from the
stomach.

Green corn (Kreos) Unriped corn.
Grumous (Ham.) Clotted; lumpy.


718 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

i EL EEE

Hectic Fever (Abrot.) An afternoon rise of fever. Seen in active tuberculosis.
Hem and hawk (Arg. M.) Cleaning the throat noisily.

Hemicrania (Arg. N., Amyl. N.,) Unilateral headache as in migrane.
Hemiopia (Aur. M.) Loss of vision for one half of the visual field.

Herpes Circinatus (Sep., Tell.) Dermatitis herpetiformis (resembling herpes).

Herpes Zoster (Hepar.) It is caused by varicellazoster virus; the virus attacks sensory
nerves with severe pain and appearance of vesicles along the distribution of the nerves
involved (usually unilateral).

Hernia (Plum.) The abnormal protrusion of an organ, through an aperture in the
surrounding structures.

Herring (Agnus, c.) A kind of North Atlantic fish.

Hiccough (Tab.) An involuntary inspiratory spasm of the respiratory organs ending in a
sudden closure of the glottis, with the production of a characteristic sound.

Hideous faces (Bell.) Horrible, frightful faces.
High game (Crot.) Stale meat (Ref. Webster's New world dictionery).

Hippocratic face (Camp, Carb. v., Sec. C., Ver. A.) A peculiar facial expression found in
dehydration with prominent malar bones.

Hissing respiration (Acet. Ac.) Respiration with hissing sound.
Home-sickness (Cap, Phos. Ac.) Depression, as a result of absence from home.
Hot medicines (Nux V.) Stimulants.

Hour glass contraction (Sec. C.) Constriction in the middle likes and glass which runs out
in one hour.

Hovering (Asar.) Hanging in the air.

Humid Asthma (Nat. S.) Asthma in damp weather.

Humming in ears (Kreos.) Continuous sound that is made by bees.

Hunterian (hard) Chancre (Merc. P. Jod, Merc. S.) The hard sore of primary syphilis.
Hydrocephalus Accumulation of fluid in cerebral ventricles.

Hydrocephalus tubercular (Hell-N) Hydrocephalus due to tuberculosis.

Hydrogenoid constitution (of Grauvogl) (Ant. T, Nat. S., Thuj) The patient suffering
from this constitution is very susceptible to any thing which in anyway increases the
atoms of water in the organism. So he feels worse in cold damp weather, in rain, by
bathing or even from eating animals which live in water like fish etc. All symptoms are
aggravated by taking cold foods & drinks but chiefly by living near water or standing
inwater.

Hydrothorax (Merc. Sulph.) The presence of fluid in the pleural cavity.

Hyperaesthesia (Taran.) Excessive sensitiveness of a part.


ALLEN'S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 719

Hypochondriacs (Alum, Anac., Mez., Nux. M.) A morbid concern about the health and
exaggarated attention to any unusual bodily or mental sensations; an unfounded belief
that one is suffering from some disease.

Hysterical women (Bar. C., Gels, Hyos, Plat, Nux-M, Sep., Valeriana) Women prone to
hysteria.

Hysteria (Actaea; Crocus, s; Caulo; MagMur. Nux Mosch; Platind): A neurosis usually
arising from mental conflict and repression and characterized by the production of a
diversity of symptoms e.g. tics, paralysis, anaesthesia etc. The disorder is characterized
by dissociation.

Ichorous (Anth, Psor, Carb. A.) Watery acrid discharge.

Icicle (Merc. S.) Tapering ice-formation, produced by freezing of successive drops trickling
from the point of attachment.

Icterus (Ant. T.) Jaundice.

Idiopathic neuroma (Calen) An old general term for any neoplasm derived from cells of the
nervous system, the cause of which is unknown.

Ill at ease in Society (Coco) Feels embarrassed uncomfortable in Society.

Illusions (Actaea. R., Sabad.) A false perception; the mistaking of something for what it is
not.

Imbecility (Nat. C.) Weak mindedness or.stupidity.

Impending paralysis (Ant. T.) Imminent paralysis.

Inaptness (Sulph. Ac.) Awkwardness.

Incarcerated (Cooa) Confined; imprisoned; denoting, for example, an irreducible hernia :
imprisoned wind.

Incessant (Kali Br. Kreos, Lac-D, Med, Tabac, Rumex, Merc. C.) Continuous.

Incipient: Initial stage.

Incipient consumption (Med.) Tuberculosis in early stage.

Incipient phthisis (Millif) Initial stage of tuberculosis.

Incoherent speech (Hyos,) Inconsistent speech.

Indecisive (Ign, Puts,) Hesitating; Unable to take decisions.

Indignation (Colo, Staph) Anger excited by supposed meanness, injustice, wickedness or
misconduct.

Indolent (Aloe, Cap, Con, Lack; Sep.) Slothful, lazy.
Indolent circulation (Agar.) Sluggish circulation.


720 Text Book or WAIERIA MEDICA

oO

Inebriates (Crot. H. Eup.): Habitual drunkards.

Ingrowing toe nail (Nit. Ac.+ Sil) A toe nail, one edge of which is overgrown by the nail fold,
producing a pyrogenic granuloma.

Insular patches (Nat. M.) Patches of the nature of an island.
Intersecting rings (Sen.) Rings that cut each other.

Interstitial inflammation (Phos. Ac.) Inflammation in a small space, gap or hole in the
substance of an organ or tissue.

Intussusception (Plum.) A condition in which one part of the bowel slips into the lower part,
causing interstitial obstruction. It occurs most commonly in infants.

Inveterate (Nit. Ac.) Obstinate.

Iracible (Ma V.) Irritable, Hot tempered.
Iridectomy(Led) Excision of a portion of the iris.
Irresolute (Ign.) Who cannot take firm stand.
Ischuria (Dulc.) Retention or suppression of urine.

Isomorphic (Phos.) Equal or Similar in form or shape.

Jolting (Ham. V.) Shaking with jerks from seat, as on rough road journey.
Jovial (Cap.) Merry. Very cheerful and good-humoured.

Keen (Lye.) Very sharp.

Keratitis (Crot. H.) Inflammation of the cornea.

Keratoiritis (Crot. H.) Inflammation of both cornea and Iris.

Knuckles (Med.) A prominence produced by the head of any of themetacarpal bones.
Krout (Sour) (firv Fetr.) Dried leaves of cabbage, soaked in saline water.

_t |

Labyrinthine vertigo (Meniere’s disease) (Theridion) Distension of membranous
labyrinth of middle ear from excess fluid. Pressure causes ischaemia and failure of
function of nerve of hearing and balance, thus there is fluctuating deafness, tinnitus &
vertigo.



Languid (Mag p., Puls, Taran) Exhausted.

Languor (Mejon, Med) Slackness. Lacking vigour or energy; tiredness or laziness of mind
and body. :

Laparatomy (Bism.) Cutting of abdominal wall for access to cavity of abdomen.
Lardaceous base (Merc., Merc. 5.) Lard or fat like degenerated-tissue at the bottom.
Laryngeal phthisis (Dros.) Tuberculosis of larynx.

Lascivious mania (Hyos.) Lustful; sexual mania.

Lassitude (Benz. A., Plumb) Extreme weakness.

Laudable pus (Nit. A.) Pus that indicates healthy granulation of the ulcer. A term formerly
used to describe pus, under the notion that it was nice to have it in a wound.

Laurel berris (Alum.) Like small roundish fruit of Laurel tree (Bay-tru)
‘Lets up with a Snap’ (Puts.) Diminishes or ceases with a sudden terrible pain.

Leucophlegmatic (Calc. Ost., Cyclam) Flabby, calm, apathetic, slow to act or react;
unexcitable.

Leud thoughts (Se/en.) Lustful thoughts.
Lienteria (Abrot.) Diarrhoea in which the stool contains ufidigested food.
Lightning like pain (Mag. C., Mag. P.) Pain appearing and disappearing quickly.

Limburger cheese (Sanic.) Type of cheese ripened by bacteria and surface micro-organisms.
It has strong offensive odour or stalecurd like smell.

Linea nasalis (Aeth.) Along narrow line on either sides of the nose.
Listless (Lil. T., Phos A.) Languid; having no energy, vitality or enthusiasm.

Lithic diathesis (Sarsa) A supposed tendency to the formation of uric acid in excess,with
resulting rheumatic and gouty symptoms.

Lithotomy (Staph.) A cutting operation for the removal of stone from bladder.
Lively to serene (Nux M.) From joyful mood to serious mood.
Liver spots (Plum) Whitish spot which later changes into dark brown due to liver diseases.

Lochia (Caulo, Kreos, Pyr.) The vaginal discharge which occurs during the puerperium. At
first pure blood, it later becomes paler, diminishes in quantity and finally ceases.

Lock jaw (Cicuta, Hyp) Tetanus; specially, trismus (See trismus).

Loud snoring (Op.) A rough rattling inspiratory noise produced by vibration of the
pendulous palate or vocal cords during sleep or coma.

Lymphatic constitution (Aster., Bapt., Bell., Hep. S.): It is marked by pallor, slow and
shallow respiration, sluggish circulation hyperplasia of the lymphatic glands and
tendency to inflammation of the skin and lymphatics.

Lymphatic temperament (Bapt., Thuj.) Flabby, pale, sluggish (qual-ities formally causes
attributed to excess of lymph.).


722 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Lyssophqbia (Lyssin) A morbid fear of being affected with rabies. Immitative neurosis
caused by such fear in person who have had a dog bite (Lyssa-old term of rabies).

Magnetized (desire to be) (Phos, Sil, Calc.) Want to be rubbed.
Malicious (Anac., Lye., Nux. M.) Desire to tease or do certain offences.
Malignant dyscrasia (Hydr) Tendency to be affected by malignant diseases (Fatal diseases),

Malignant Pustules (Anth) Violent or dangerous pustules; Pustule means a small
circumscribed elevation on the skin, containing pus.

Mania (Stram, Verat) One phase of manic depressive psychoses in which the prevailing mood
is one of undue elation and there is pronounced pyschomotor overactivity and often
pathological excitement.

Marasmus (Arg. N.) Wasting away of the body, especially that of a baby, without apparent
cause.

Matrices of nails (Hyp.) The formative portion of a nail.
Melancholy temperament (Lack. Murex-p. Tuber.) Sad, low spirited temperament.
Meniere’s disease (Ther.) See Labyrinthine vertigo.

Membranous Croup (Brom, lod, Merc-C) Laryngitis with fibrinous exudation; it may be a
specific (diphtheritic) or simple plastic inflammation.

Membranous dysmenorrhoea (Brom) Dysmenorrhoea accompanied by an exfoliation of the
menstrual decidua.

Menorrhagia (Sab., Sep. Sulph. Tril.) Excessively profuse or pro-longed menstruation.
Mental traumatism (Nat. s.) Mental shock.

Mercurial amalgam fillings (Merc. D.) Filling of teeth by a mixture of any metal with
mercury.

Mesmerism (Hyp., phos) Animal magnetism; a system of therapeutics from which developed
hypnotism and therapeutic suggestion.

Meteorism (Tereb.) Excessive accumulation of gas in the intestines. Tympanites.

Miliary rash (Amman. C) Rash resembling a mil let seed in size (about 2 mm.) or Rash
marked by the presence of nodules of millet seed size on any surface.

Miller’s Asthma (Samb) Asthma of a person who grinds grain into flour with grinding stone.
Minutegun Cough (Dros.) Cough at intervals of a minute.
Moles (Sabina) —

1. An intra uterine mass formed by the degeneration of the partly developed ovum.
2. Nevus pigmentosus; pigmentary nevus; a congenital neoplasm.

Morning sickness (Lobelia, Merc., Sep.) Typical nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 723

Morose (Tub) Melancholy.

Mortification (Aur. M., Bry.) Humiliation.

Moth spots (Caulo) Black spots.

Mottled (Hydr.) Irregular arrangement of spots or confluent blotches of colour.
Mucolymph (Arg. N.) Pale yellow fluid contaming mucus membrane of intestine.
Muco Purulent (Arg. N.) Containing mucus and pus.

Mucous Condylomata (Thuj.) A wart like excrescence at the anus or -vulva or on glans
penis, oozing moisture.

Mucous piles (Ant. cr.) A good deal of mucus continually discharged from anus (W.H. Burt;
physiological Mat. Med.).

Musk (Agnus) Odoriferous dried reddish-brown secretion from preputial (penis) follicle of
Musk Deer.

Musty-odour (Nat. c., Stan.) Odour of mould (putrid).

Naevus (Fi. A.) A mole; a circumscribed lesion of the skin arising from pigment producing
cells (melanoma) or due to a developmental abnormality of blood vessels (angioma).

Narcosis (Sang.) Stupor or general anaesthesia produced by some narcotic drugs.
Nares (Cap, Merc. D.) The nostrils.
Anterior n. - The pair of openings from the exterior into the nasal cavities.
Posterior, n. - The pair of openings from the nasal cavities into the nasopharynx.
Nates (Lac. C.) Buttocks.
Neuritis (Calen.) Inflammation of the nerve.
Neurasthenia (Pic. A) Nervous exhaustion.

Beard’s disease : A functional neurosis marked by intense nervous irritability and
weakness.

Nervous temperament (Glon, Ign., Mag. C., Nit-A. sec. c) One in which the subject is
mentally and physically alert, with rapid pulse,, excitability, often volubility but not
always fixity of purpose.

Nodosities (Benz. A., Led., Staph, phyk) Knots; knob-like swelling of joints.

Nostrums (Nux v.) A quack medicine; atherapeutic agent, secret or patented, offered to the
general public as a specific remedy for any disease or class of diseases.

Not to be allayed (Aeon) Not to be made of less value.
Noxious effluvia (Crotalus) Harmful and foul smelling things.


724 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Nymphomania (Murex, Plat.) Extreme erotism or sexual desire in women; correlated with
satyriasis in men. ,

Nystagmus (Physo) Rhythmical oscillation of the eyeballs, either horizontal, rotatory or

vertical.
Obscene things (Lit. T.) Lewd things.

Obscuration (Ruta) Darkness, indistinctness.
Old sinners (Agnus) Debauch (See Debauch.).
Old toper (Carbo. V.) A person addicted to alcoholic drinks for a long period.

Onanism (Arg. M., Calad, Lack, Plat, Staph.)The word used by some, though incorrectly, as
synonymous with masturbation. Coitus interruptus.

Ophthalmia Neonatorum (Arg N., Syph, Thuj) Purulent discharge from the eyes of infant
commencing within 21 days of birth. Only 6% of total cases are gonorrhoeal, but all are
notifiable.

Opisthotonos (Cicuta, Nat. S., Ver. V) A tetanic spasm in which the spine and extremities
are bent with convexity forward, the body resting on the head and the heels.

Oppression (Millif.) Heaviness or sensation of weight.

Orbital neuralgia (Chel.) Pain of a severe throbbing or stabbing character in the course or
distribution of the nerves supplying to orbits.

Orchitis (Spong.) Inflammation of the testis.
Otorrhoea (Mere, s., Psor.) A discharge from the external auditory meatus.

Ozaena (Amman C., Aur. M., Nit. Ac.) A foul odor present in certain cases of atrophic.
syphilitic and other forms of chronic rhinitis.

PL

Painter’s colic (Alum) Lead colic; i.e. severe abdominal pain, with constipation,
symptomatic of lead poisoning.

Pallid (Amyl. N.) Pale.
Panaritium (All c., Amman, c.) Whitlow; paronychia.

Papescent (Bism) Pasty.

Paralysis agitans (Merc.) Parkinson's disease. A syndrome of mask-like expression,
shuffling gait, tremor of the limbs.

Parched (Bry.) Hot & dry.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 725

Parchment (Sabad) A kind of paper prepared from the skin of ship or goat.
Paresis (Op.) Partial or incomplete paralysis.
Paronychia (Diasco) A whitlow. Suppurative inflammation around a fingernail.

Paroxysm anticipates (Cinch) Paroxysm comes .before the appointed time i.e., malarial
paroxysm when it. recurs progressively at shorter interval.

Parturition (Rhus) Child birth; labor; giving birth to a child.

Peaches (Allium) A kind of fruit.

Peevish (Ant. c., Cham, Mur. Ac., Tub., Ars. Alb, Medo, Cycl.) Querulous, irritable.
Pendent shreds (Aur. M.) Hanging fragments.

Pernicious intermittent (Camph.) Intermittent fever of severe character and usually fatal.

Pernicious anaemia (Pic. Ac) Results from failure to absorb vitamin Bj, so that
erethropoiesis becomes megaloblastic.

Pessaries (Nux M.) An appliance of varied form, introduced into the vagina to support the
uterus or to correct any displacement.

Petechia (Sul. A.) Minute haemorrhogic spots, a pin point to pin-head size, in the skin.

Pettish (Fer. .) Peevish, petulent. Childishly bad/tempered pr impa-tient, esp. about
unimportant things.

Petulently rejects (cham) Irritably rejects.
Phagedenic ulceration (Merc Cym.) An ulcer that rapidly spreads peripherally.
Phlegmatic habit (Aloe, Cap, Pul, Mez.) Calm, apathetic, unexcitable.

Phthisis florida (Theridion) Pulmonary tuberculosis where fibrotic changes have taken
place to a great extent.

Phymosis (Merc. 5.) Narrowness of the opening of the prepuce.

Physometra (Brom, Lye., Nux. M.) Distention of the uterine cavity with air or gas.
Pickles (Ant. c.) Brine, vinegar or similar liquor in which food is preserved.

Piles, Strangulated (Lach.) Piles constricted so as to cut off the blood supply.
Pinning boys (Aur. M.) Emaciated boys.

Pipe Stem Stool (Digi.) Slender stool like tubular part of tobacco pipe.

Piteous moaning (Cham.) Lamentation evoking pity.

Plethoric habit (Acon. N. Amyl. N., Bell., Calc. ost., Cap, Kali br., Stram, Sulph, Ver. v.) The
constitution having excess amount of blood. Unhealthy condition of the body marked by
an excess of red corpuscles in the blood.

Plica polonica (Psor.,Tub.) A matted condition of the hair caused by filth and the presence
of parasites.

Plug (Kali. Bi.) A small wedge.
Pneumogastric Nerve (Ant. T.) Vagus Nerve; The 10th cranial nerve.


726 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Poisonous mushrooms (Camp.) Some mushrooms are edible and some are poisonous.

Polypi (Sang.) A general descriptive term used with reference to any mass of tissue, that
bulges or Projects outward or upward or downward from the normal surface level.

Pot-belliedness (Sep.) Belly swollen like a pot.

Priapism (Canth, Pic. A. Sel.) Prolonged penile erection in the absence of sexual
stimulation.

Prophetic perceptions (Lack) Quality of understanding what will be happening in future.

Prosopalgia (Spig.) Trigeminal neuralgia. Excruciating pain in distribution of Trigeminal
nerve.

Psoric Constitution (Calc. ost., Hell. N., Psor, Sil, Sulph.) The persons having this
constitution are over sensitive both physically and mentally and frequently suffer from
functional disturbances arising from emotional disturbances. Skin dry, unwashed
appearing with numerous eruptions. Itching, ameliorated by scratching, but skin burns
and smarts afterwards. Hands and feet burn, flushes of heat, especially over face. Desires
hot foods and meats. Cannot stand still; the patient must walk or lean against something
if he is on his feet. Very much susceptible to cold; Complaints, ameliorated by heat;
aggravated by winter; ameliorated by summer. A psoric patient is always afraid of dying
but lives on for years.

Ptomaine (Pyr.) Any of various amine compounds (some toxin.) formed in putrefied animal
and vegetable matter.

Ptosis (Rhus, Syph.) Drooping of the upper eyelid, due to a fault of development, to paralysis
of the levator palpebrae muscle, to a weighing of the lid by a tumor, or to recession of the
supporting eyeball.

Ptyalism (Dulc., Kreos., Merc.) Excessive salivation.

Puckered (Hydr.) Contracted, gathered into wrinkles, folds or bulges.

Puerperal mania (Acted) Mania in the period of about 42 days following childbirth.

Mania: A form of psychosis characterised by exalted feelings, delusion, elevation of mood and
overproduction of ideas.

Pulse wiry (Pyr.) A small, fine, incompressible pulse.
Puny (Lye., Mag. M.) Stunted.
Purple hue (phyt.) Purple colour i.e., colour mixed with red & blue.

Purpura haemorrhagica (crotalus H, Sulph. A., Tereb.) A condition characterized by
haemorrhage into skin mucus membrane, internal organs and other tissues. It is
characterised by a greatly diminished platelet count. The clotting time is normal but the
bleeding time is prolonged.

Pusillanimous (Lye.) Easily frightened; timid.

Pyrogenic process [latent] (Pyr.) Slowly advancing fever accompanying septicaemia.

Pyrosis (Bism, Nux M.) Heart-burn; water-brash. Eructation of acid gastric contents into the
mouth accompanied by a burning sensation felt behind the sternum.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE ~ an easy explanation 727

| a |

Quack remedies (Nux v.) Same as Nostrum.
Quinsy (Bar. C., Psor.) Peritonsillar abscess; acute suppurative in-flammation of the faucial

tonsil and surrounding tissues.
Rachitis (Calc. P. Sil.) Rickets.

Racking (Bry. Mez.) Shaking the body violently.

Rage (Apis, Crocus.) Violent anger.
Rakes (Cocc.) Dissipated or immoral man of fashion.

Ranula (Ambra, Thuj.) A cystic tumour on the floor of the mouth, due to obstruction on the
duct of the sublingual glands; any cystic tumour of the under surface of the tongue or floor

of the mouth.

Rasping (Spong.) Harsh sound.

Rave (Stram, Agar. M.) Rage; Talk as if mad.

Reflex Symptoms (Actaea, Caulo) Any systemic disorder that exhibits the disorder of
another system.

Repose (Mag. C., Nux M, Rhus.) Rest.

Repress (Lil. T.) Suppress.

Reprimanded (/gn.,Stram.) Rebuked.

Repugnant (Nux V., Rheum.) Distasteful.

Retiring (Mag. C., Zinc.) Going to bed.

Retrocession (Op.) The cessation of the external symptoms of a disease followed by signs of
involvement of some internal organ or part.

Retroversion (Lil. T.) A turning backward, as of the uterus, without flexing or bending the

organ.
Rheumatic diathesis (Ben, A., Led., Phyt., Rhus.) Disposition of being attacked with
rheumatism.
Rheumatic dysmenorrhoea (Actaea) Difficult and painful menstruation resulting from
rheumatism.

Rhuberb (Rheum) Purgative.
Ribbon like stool (Am. M.) Tape like stool.


728 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Risus sardonicus (Stram.) The semblance of a grin (Smile broadly so as to show the teeth),
caused by facial spasm especially in tetanus. Risus means ‘a laugh’.

Rocking (Kali, c.) Moving gently to and fro.
Romantic girls (Cocc,) Sentimental or emotional or visionary girls.

Rose Cold (Sang.) Paroxysmal-rhinorrhoea (running of the nose) caused by allergy of rose
pollen.

Ruddy people (Aur. M.) People having red skin.

Rules of preparing acids (Carb. A.) According to Homoeopathic pharmacopoea, distilled
water is mostly used for preparing medicines from acid sources. As for example Acid pic,
Acid oxal, Acid Hydrocya-nic, Acid Nit, Acid phos, Acid Sulph etc. But, as Carbolic acid is
not soluble in distilled water, it is prepared with the help of ‘Alcohol’. This is an exception
to the rule of preparing acid.

Saddle (Sep.) Leather seat for riding on horse. ~

Salpingitis (Med.) Inflammation of the Fallopian tube or sometime that of the Eustachian
tube also.

Salvation (Lil. T., Psor.) Saving of the soul.

Sanguine temperament or constitution (Arm. M., Aster., Aur. M., Hyos., Plat., Nux V.,
Phos., Sil., Ver. A.) The person having excess amount of blood. Plethoric; having a red
complexion, light hair and eyes and a quick but not lasting temper.

Sanious liquid blood (Sec. c.) Having the character of thin, foetid, seropurulent bloody
discharge from wound or ulcer.

Sanious pus (Phyt.) Thin foetid, seropurulent discharge from a wound.

Sapraemia (Pyr.) A general bodily reaction to circulatory toxins and breakdown products of
saprophytic organisms, derived from one or more foci in the body.
Satyriasis (Pic. A.) Excessive sexual excitement in male.

Scarlatina (Amman. C., Apoc., Psor., Sang, Tereb.) Scarlet fever; an acute exanthematous
disease, marked by fever and other constitutional disturbances and a generalized
eruption of closely aggregated points or small macules of a bright red colour, followed by
desquamation.

Sciatica (Rhustox, Coloc.) Neuralgia of the sciatic nerve, felt at the back of the thigh.

Scirrhous (Apis,, Med., Spig.,) A hard cancerous tumour due to overgrowth of fibrous tissue.

Scirrhous carcinoma (Med.) Fibrous cancer; a cancer in which indu-ration has occurred
through overgrowth of fibrous connective tissue in the stroma, the opposite of medullary
cancer.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 729

Sclerosis (Plumb) Term used in pathology to describe abnormal hardening or fibrosis of a
tissue.

Scorbutic (Kreos.) Affecting with scurvy (Due to deficiency of Vit. C).

Scorbutic Cachexia (Staph) A general wasting, occurring when suffering from scurvy.

Scrambled eggs (Sonic.) Eggs cooked by beating and then heating in a saucepan with butter
and milk.

Scrawny (Arg. N., Sec. c.) Thin.

Scrofulous (Baryt. C., Brom., Calc. P., Con. M., Diph., lod, Nil. Ac., Phos. A. Samb, Sii,
Sulph.) Same as strumous constitution.

Scrofulous exostosis (Ruta) A bony tumour springing from the surface of a bone of a
scrofulous diathetic person.

Scrofulous ophthalmia (Bar. c.) Purulent conjunctivitis of scrofulous diathetic children.

Scurf (Psor.) Dandruff; branny desquamation.

Scum (Mag. c.) Layer of dirt on a pond or other area of still water.

Sea-sickness (Carb-Ac, Coce, Petr., Tab.) A disorder of equilibrium occurring on boarda ship
and due to the stimulation of the semicircular canals by the unaccustomed movements of
the body in space; there are giddiness, malaise, nausea and vomiting; a form of motion
sickness.

Second Childhood (Bar. C., Op.) Old age.

Secundines (Pyr.) The after birth, the membranes and placenta, the expulsion of which,
following the birth of the child constitutes the third stage of labor.

Sedentary life (Aloe, Ammon C., Nux V., Ranunc. B.) A person inclined by nature or driven
by occupation spends most of the parts of his daily life in sitting position.

Seized with desire to urinate (Petros) Sudden inclination to urinate.

Semi stupid (Diph.) Semi stuoprous condition.

Sentient nerves (Hyp.) Nerves capable of carrying sensations.

Sequalae (Variol.) A morbid condition following as a consequence of another disease.
Sewer gas (Pyr.) Foul air of public drain.

Sexual erethism (Murex.) An abnormal state of sexual excitement or irritation.
Shingles (Ran. B.) Herpes zoster.

Shreddy strips (Arg. N.) Form pieces of thread.

Shrinking look (Stram.) Collapsed condition due to fear.

Sibilant (Spong.) Hissing or whistling in character; denoting a form of rale.

Sick headache (Cocc, Sang, Tab, Ver-V.) Migraine; a symptom complex occurring
periodically and characterized by pain in the head, usually unilateral, vertigo, nausea and
vomiting, photophobia.

Slimy stool (Chel, Merc.) Slippery stool.


730 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Smelling bottle (Ammon. C.) A bottle containing Ammonium carbo nate used for smelling.
“Sneaking”, nervous form fever (Cocc.) Fever without remarkable signs & symptoms.

Snuffles (Amman. C., Lye.) Obstructed nasal respiration, especially in the newborn infant
sometimes due to congenital syphilis.

Somersault (Lye.) Leap or fall in which one turns heels over head before bending on one’s
feet.

Somnambulism (Kali Br., Sit.) Sleep walking, a state of dissociated consciousness in which
sleeping and waking states are combined, considered normal in children but as an illness
having a hysterical basis in adults.

Sopor (Cinch, Hell. V, Op.) Stupor; an unnaturally deep sleep.

Sordes (Hyos.) Dried, brown crusts v/hich form in the mouth, especially on the lips and teeth,
in illness.

Sore (Phos, Arg. M., Bap.): Painfull; ulcerated.
Sour Krout (Bry, Petr.) Dried cabbage leaves soaked in strong saline water.
Spare, dry, thin subject (Alum) Lean, thin person.

Spasm : clonic (Cup. M., Plb.) Spasm in which rigidity of muscles is followed immediately
by relaxation.

Spasm : tonic (PIb.) Spasm in which rigid’ty of muscles persists for a considerable time.

Squirming Sensation (Nat. M.) Wriggling sensation, i.e., crawling sensation.

Staggering (Kali Br.) Moving unsteadily.

Stercoraceous (Pyr.) Fecal; Stercoral; relating to or containing faces.

Stertor (Arn. M.) Loud snoring; sonorous breathing.

Strabismus (Tab.) Squint i.e. in co-ordinated action of the muscles of the eyeball, such that
the visual axis of the two eyes fail to meet at the objective point.

Strangling (Ipec.) Suffocating.

Strangulated hernia (Nux. V., Plb) Hernia not reducible by ordinary means.

Strangury (Berb, Canth, Tereb.) Slow and painfull micturition.

Stretching (Amy I. N.) Extension of limbs in various direction as usually after sleep.

Strumous constitution (Apis, Baryta C. Crot. H., Diph.) Scrofulous constitution : A
constitutional state, occurring in the young marked by a lack of resisting power of the
tissues, predisposing to tuberculosis; lymphatism is present and there is a proneness to
eczematous eruptions, ulceration, glandular swellings, respiratory catarrhs etc.
tuberculosis of the glands, bones or joints is common. Two types are recognized - (1) The
lymphatic or phlegmatic, in which there is a tendency to fat with a coarse muddy
complexion, thick lips, coarse hair; (2) Sanguine, in which the skin is clear changing
readily from pale to pink, the eyes blue and the hair fine and silky, with spareness of
figure and mental activity (Stedman’s Diet.). The most prominent feature of this


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 731

constitution is tuberculous cervical adenitis with or without ulceration (Butter worth
Medical Diet. 2nd Ed.). ,

Stubbing a toe (Colch.) Striking toe against something hard (stone etc.).

Stump (Phos. Ac.) Amputated end.

Stupor (Bapt., phos. Ac.) A state of marked impairment of, but not complete loss of
consciousness. The victim shows gross lack of responsiveness, usually reacting only to
noxious stimuli. A condition of unconsciousness with suppression of sense of feeling.

Sub-involution (Lil. T., Podo, Psor.) An arrest in the normal involution of uterus following
child-birth, the organ remaining abnormally large.

Subsultus tendinum (Hyas) Twitching movements of the muscles & tendons particularly of
the wrist occurring in typhoid or asthenic fever.

’ Suggillation (Ham. V.) Ecchymosis; a black and blue mark.

Sulky (Ant. cr., Plat., Tub.) Unsocial from ill temper.

Sultry (Sep.) Hot and oppressive weather.

Sunburn (Ant. Cc, Canth.) Erythema caused by the actinic (short wave radiation) rays of the

Sun. A dermatitis associated with redness.often blistering of the skin due to exposure to
sun, .

Sunken Countenance (Lack. Sec. c.) Face with prominent malar bones.

Sunstroke (Glon, Ver. v.) Final stage of heat exhaustion, when the body is unable to lose
heat; hyperpyrexia occurs and death may ensue. The basic defect is failure of the heat
regulating mechanism of the body (Syn: Bksieigg ‘

Swarthy Person (Cinch.) Dark- complexioned person."

Swashing Sensation (Crot. T.) Splashing sound of a fluid.

Sweeten the stomach (Mag. C.) Mag: carb taken i in crude form to neutralise the acidity of
- stomach in order to make less painful.

Sycosis (Thuja, Medo.) It is gonorrhoeal stigma. Sycosis is established after gonorrhoea is ~
suppressed by external methods. Then it becomes a systematic stigma, permeating every
living cell of the organism. (The Principles and Art of Cure by Homoeopathy—H. A.
Roberts).

Sycosis menti (Cicuta.) Barber’s itch (Skin diseases of bearded part of face).

Sycotic diathesis (Asterius, Med., Nat. s., Phos, Ac, Sarsa, Thuj.) Patients of this diathesis
are suspicious, cross and irritable, deceitful, jealous, cruel and vindictive. They suffer
frdm diseases associated with proliferation and infiltration of tissues; warty growths and
gouty concretions; valvular diseases of the heart. Complaints ameliorated by abnormal
discharges (e.g. Leucorrhoea, coryza etc.). They are prone to be attacked by Asthma,
Rheumatism, diseases of genito-urinary organs.

Sycotic Pneumonia (Nat. S.) Pneumonia having sycotic base or sy cotic back-ground.

Sympathetic cough (Naja T.) Cough associated with the heart disease.


732 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA
pan Lp ORIN

Sympathetic heart troubles with ovarian or uterine irritation (Actea) Heart troubles
that exhibits the disorder of uterus or ovaries.

Symptoms erratic (Lac c.) Symptoms irregular in behaviour.

Synchondroses (Trill.) A union between two bones formed either by hyaline cartilage oy
fibrocartilage.

Syphilitic Angina (Hydr.) Syphilitic sore throat.

Syphilitic dyscrasia (Fl. Ac., Phos. Ac., Nit. A. Syph.) A general morbid condition
associated with ulceration and destruction of tissues. A patient of syphilitic miasm is dull,
stupid, stubborn, sullen, morose and usually suspicious; Melancholic and condemn
themselves; very silent; wants to commit suicide; Forgetful and slow comprehensive.
Complaints are aggravated at night, becomes restless and anxious. Complaints are
aggravated at summer and ameliorated in winter. Ulceration and discharge of pus with
offensive odour but it ameliorates the complaints. Eruptions crusty and oozing pus, skin
greasy and sweaty; much offensive odour; sweat does not relieve. Hair tends to fall out.

Desires cold food & aversion to meat.
Tallow-like masses (Mag. C.) Fatlike lump.

Tangled (Borax) Inter-twine; cbnfused mass.

Tarsal (Arg. M.)
1. The root of the foot or instep. As a division of the skeleton, the seven bones of the

instep.
2. The thin elongated plates of dense connective tissue found in each eyelid, contributing

to its form and support.
Tarsal tumour (Thuj.) Tumour on the tarsipalpebra of eyes.
Tedious (Actaea) Tiresome.
Tell tale face (Sep.) The face that tells the story of the suffering.
Temperament
1. The physical organization peculiar to the individual, which influences one’s metabolic
process, manner of thought and action, and general views of life.
2. That aspect of personality which denotes a person’s emotional disposition.
Tenacious (Canth, Nux v.)

1. Adhesive, sticky; strongly cohesive.
2. Keeping a firm hold on property, principles, life etc.

Tettery eruption (Alum, Bov.) A colloquial term properly applied to eczema and occasionally
applied to other eruption.
Thin spare subjects (Calc. P.) Lean & thin person.


ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 733

Threatened abortion (Sec. c.) Crampy pains and slight show of blood that may or may not
be followed by the expulsion of the foetus during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy. Cervix
remains closed and there is a possibility of continuation of pregnancy.

Tickling cough (Ham. V.) Cough with a creeping tingling sensation in the throat.

Titillating cough (Dros.) Tickling cough.

Tobacco heart (Tab.) The occurrence of numerous ectopic beat produced by smoking in
susceptible individual.

Tonicity (Caulo.) Healthy elasticity of muscles etc.

Too ugly to live (Cham.) Repulsive.

Tormenting (Caulo., Lil. T.) Severe bodily or mental suffering.

Tornado (Carbo. An.) Violent storm of small extent with whirling winds esp. in W. Africa at
beginning and end of rainy season : Hurricane.

Torpid (Hep. S.) Sluggish.

Torpor (Plum.) Mentally sluggish.

Tossing about (Coffea) Move restlessly from side to side or up and down.

Tottering (Alum:) Standing or walking unsteadily.

Translucent (Phyt.) Transmitting light but not transparent.

Transudation (Crot. T.) The passage of a fluid through a melnbrane.

Treading on nails (Hyp.) Setting down foot on nails.

Trifle (Cocc.) Thing, fact, circumstance, of little value or importance.

Trismus (Cicutd) Lockjaw; a firm closing of the jaw due to tonic spasm of the muscles of
mastication from disease of the motor branch of the trigeminal nerve, usually associated
with and due to general tetanus.

Tubercular diathesis (Chel., Rumex, Spong., Tub.) The individuals of this diathesis are tall,
lean and thin with a flat narrow chest, narrow subcostal angle, narrow facies due to their
peculiar mental make-up and are easily affected by hurry, worry and emotional stress.
They take cold easily-and suffer from glandular swellings, tonsillitis, cough and catarr-,
hal inflammation. Usually they give a history of Tuberculosis in their family and are very
much susceptible to be attacked with Tuberculosis.

Tubercles (Led.)
1. A small rounded prominence usually on bone.
2. The specific lesion produced by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Tumefied (Phyt.) Swollen.
Tumultuous heart action (Amy. Nit.) Viole’nt palpitation disorderly.
Tympanitis (Tereb.) Abdominal distension due to accumulation of gas in the intestine.

Typhoid fever (Tarax.) An infectious fever usually spread by contam-ination of food, milk or
water supplies with salmonella typhi. The most important member of the enteric group of
fevers.


734 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Typhus (Apoc., Bapt., Crot., H., Lack., Nit. A., Pyr., Sel.) An acute infectious and contagious
disease, caused by RICKETTSIA, marked by high fever, great mental and physical
depression and a macular and papular eruption. It lasts for about two weeks.

U

Umbilical hernia (Cocc., Plumb.) One in which bowel or omentum protrudes through the
abdominal wall under the skin at the umbilicus.

Union by first intention (Calend.) The immediate healing of a wound without suppuration
or the formation of granulations.

Unmerited insults (Staph.) Undeserved insults.
Unsightly scars (Kali Br.) Ugly scars, displeasing to eye.
Unwieldy (Cal. c.) Not easily moved.

Uvula (Phyt.) The central, tag-like structure hanging down from the free edge of the soft
palate.

V

Vaginismus (Mag. P.) Painful spasm of the vagina preventing satisfactory coitus.
Varicose ulcers (Calen, Ham. V.) Ulcers of indolent type which occurs in the lower third of
a leg afflicted with varicose veins.
Vegetable analogue (Nat. M., Phos.,) Parallel or similar to the medicine prepared from
vegetable kingdom.
Vehement (Bry.) Showing strong feeling, impetuous, ardent, passionate.
Veil (Tab.) Curtain.
Venerated (Plat.) Respected.
Venous plethora (Carb. A.) Congestion causing distention of veins.
Verses (Ant. Cr.) Poems.
Vexation (Apis. M., Ars. A, Aur. M., Caust., Plat., Petr.) State of irritation or distress. A state
of being annoyed or worried.
Vicarious menstruation (Bry., Crot. H., Phos.) Blood loss during menstruation at some site
other than the vagina as haemorrhage from nose, breast or eyes ete.
Vindictive (Nit A.).Revengeful; tendency to seek revenge.
2. Ultramicroscopic microorganisms parasitic within living cells causing many kinds of
diseases in plants, bacteria, insects, animals and men.
Vis medicatrix naturae (Zinc.) The healing power of Nature.
Vital fluids (Phos. A.) Essential fluids of life, e.g. Blood, Semen, Milk etc.



ALLEN’S KEY NOTE — an easy explanation 735

Vital heat (Sep.) Amount of heat required to maintain the normal function of body.
Voluptuous (Petros., Sulph.) Sensual pleasure.

WwW

Wading (Dulc.) Walking through water.

Waterbrash (Lye.) Eructation of acid gastric contents into the mouth, accompanied by a
burning sensation felt behind the Sternum.

Weariness of hands & feet (Bov., Phos.) Weakness of hand & feet.

Weary persons (Aloe, Pic. A.) Tired, with energy abated; dispirited persons.

Whining restlessness (Cham.) Long drawn complaining cry of child with restlessness.

Wild hairs (Borax.) Disorderly hairs (Out of control.).

Wilted skin (Chel.) Wrinkled skin.

Wind gall (Med.) Soft tumour on horse’s fet-lock joint (the joint of the horse’s leg above the
hoof).

Wind pipe (Kali-C.) Larynx & trachea.

Woeful (Hell. N.) Full of great sorrow or distress.

Wretchedness (Tab.) Uneasiness of body and mind.

LY |

Yeast like Vomiting (Nat. C.) Vomitus containing yellowish frothy viscous substance.

Yellow fever (Crot. H.) An acute infectious disease due to the action of a specific virus
transmitted by a mosquito of the genus Aedes. It is marked by fever, with one remission,
slow pulse, albuminuria, jaundice, congestion of the face and haemorrhages, esp.
hematemesis.

Yielding disposition (Ign., Puls, Phos. A., Sil.) Submissive temperament i.e. who does not

Zig-Zag dazzling like lightning (Nat. M.) Vision overpowered or confused with flash of too
bright light having sharp turns.
Zona (Mez.) Herpes zoster.

Zymotic diseases (Crot. H.) Any infectious or contagious disease caused by the growth of
micro-organisms.



Part - IV

737


A

Abrasion : Rubbing or scraping of skin or mucousmembrane.

Acme : Height or utmost pitch of a disease.

Acne: A papular and pustular eruption due to inflammation with accumulation of secretion,
involving the sebaceous glands.

Acrid : Irritating; biting.

Agglutination : Adhesion; sticking together.

Aggravation :, Condition of being worse.

Agonising : To make convulsive efforts, tb struggle due to pain.

Ague : Malarial fever marked by chill, heat and sweating.

Alae-nasi : Wings or flaps of the nostrils.

Alcoholism : A morbid state caused by excessive intake of alcohol interfering with the
patient’s health and social or economic functioning.

Alopecia : Baldness (falling of hair) from disease.
Amaurosis : A total loss of vision. .

Amblyopia: Dimness of vision; partial loss of sight without discoverable lesion in eye
structures or optic nerve.

Amelioration : Improvement; moderation of the intensity of symptoms.

Amiable : Having a pleasant or friendly disposition.

Anaemia : Condition in which there is reduction in the number of R.B.C. or the total amount
of Hb or both in the blood.

Anaesthesia : Total loss. of sensation, especially of the sense of touch, in skin or
mucousmembrane.

Analogue : Similar or comparable thing in certain respects.
Anasarca : Generalised infiltration of oedema-fluid in subcutaneous connective tissue.

Aneurism : (Aneurysm) Circumscribed dilatation of an artery, or a blood-containing tumour
connecting with the lumen of an artery.

Anguish : Great suffering as from worry, grief or pains ; agony.
Anorexia : Loss of appetite.

Antidote : Neutralizing or counteracting agent.

Anti-psoric : Correcting the bad effects of psoric manifestation.
Anti-syphilitic : Correcting the bad effects of syphilitic manifestation.

Anti-sycotic : Correcting the bad effects of sycotic manifestation.

739


740 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

a SS Se

Anuria : Total suppression of urine:

Apathy : Reactive absence of emotions.

Apathetic : Indifferent.

Aphthae : Thrush or whitish spots that characterise it.

Aphonia : Loss of voice not due to a central lesion.

Apoplexy : Sudden paralysis and coma from cerebral effusion or extravasation of blood.

Apprehension : Fear and anxiety in anticipation.

Ascites. Dropsy (accmulation of fluid) in the peritoneal cavity.

Asphyxia neonatorum : Distress in the newborn, due to respirtory or circulatory
difficulties.

Asthenopia : Weakness of vision.

Ataxia : Loss of power due to muscular incoordination.

Atony : Absence or lack of tone.

Atrophy : Wasting or diminution of size.

Avaricious : Greedy.

Aversion : Dislike.

Bo

Balm of Gilead : A soothing and healing medicine.
Bedsore : Ulcer of parts on which the patient constantly lies in bed.

Beseeching : Entreating.

Besotted : Congested.

Bland coryza : Coryza that does not hurt the skin.

Blonde : Fair coloured European lady.

Blushing : Face becoming red.

Borborygmus : Loud rumbling sound in the abdomen which is audible from a distance.
Boyish go : Liveliness of a boy.

Bradycardia : Slowness of heartbeat usually less than 60 per minute, reverse of
tachycardia.

Bright’s disease : A kind of kidney’ disease. ,

Broken down : Appreciably worse than the original state of health.
Bronchitis : Inflammation of the respiratory passage.

Brunette : Dark coloured European lady.


Glossary 741

Bung-hole : Wide mouth of pipe.

Bunion : Hardness of skin.

c |

Cachexia: General lack of nutrition and wasting due to a chronic disease.
Cadaverous smell: Smell like that coming from a dead body.

Calculi: Plural of calculus; stone.

Calvarium: Skull-cap. Upper dome-like portion of the skull.

Calisthenics : Instrumental exercise to improve health.

Canine hunger: Hunger like that of dog.

Canthi: Corners of eyes.

Carbuncle: Boil with many openings.

Carbogenoid constitution: Constitution with intolerance of carbon or carbon product.
Cardiac: Relating to cardia, heart.

Caries: Decay of bone leading to its death and destruction.

Carrion like : Like the decaying flesh of dead body, very repulsive.
Carphology : Involuntary picking of bed clothes.

Catarrhal ischuria: Ischuria or suppression of urine due to catarrh in bladder.
Chagrin : Grief; sorrow.

Chalazae: Heard nodosities of eyelids.

Chancre: Hard tumour usually due to syphilis.

Celebacy: The state of complete sexual abstinence.

Chemosis: Oedema of conjunctiva forming a swelling round cornea.

Chilblain: Ulceration of fingers due to exposure to severe cold.

Chlorosis : A state of pale or green discoloration of skin usually due to anaemia.
Cholera asiatica : Severe form of cholera usually epidemic.

Cholera morbus : Strong diarrhoea usually with severe colic and profuse vomiting leading
to collapse and death.

Chorea: Involuntary movement of a part.

Chordee: Painful erection of penis usually due to gonorrhoea.
Cicatrix : Scarring of skin usually due to an injury or burn.
Clenched thumb : Thumb in the fully flexed position.


742 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

ae ee
Clergyman’s sore throat : Hoarseness in a.clergyman usually due to excessive lectures.
Clinker : Hard ball of mucus.

Clonic : Irregular paroxysmal contraction.

Clumsy: unregulated, irregular.

Coalescing : Joining together.

Coryza: Running down of thin mucus from nose.

Cold abscess: Non-inflammatory abscess.

Coma vigil: Stupor with wakefulness.

Concomitants: Symptoms appearing without any logical relation to the complaint.
Commotion: Violent agitation.

Contracture: Permanent muscular contraction.

Contradiction: Opposing conditions.

Concussive: Leading to pressure on brain due to violent shakings.

Confinement : Restraint indoors due to disease or due to childbirth.
Constipation: Difficult defecation.

Corpulent: Bulky state.

Corrosive : Excoriating.

Crib: High sided bed for baby.

Cri encephalique: Brain cry, Sudden shrill cry as in meningitis and encephalitis.
Croup: Hard dry cough usually occurring in paroxysms.

Crumbling: Breaking into small pieces.

Cutaneous: Relating to skin.

Cyanosis: Blueness of skin usually due to deoxygenated discoloration.

Cyst:
1. Abnormal sac containing gas, fluid of a semi-solid matter.

2. The bladder.
D

Dandruff: Flakes of dead.skin formed on the scalp or scaly material shed from the scalp.

Death rattle : Respiratory rattling of mucus in throat of a dying person due to loss of cough
reflex.

Debauch : To go astray morally, corrupt.


Glossary ” 743

Decubitus :
1. The position of the patient in bed;
2. Bed sore.

Delirium: A confused and excited state of organic orgin marked by incoherence, illusions and
hallucination.

Delirium tremens: A form of acute insanity due to alcoholic poisoning marked by sweating,
restlessness, anxiety, precordial distress, mental congestion and hallucination.

Delusion: False belif or wrong judgment.

Desire: Liking for a thing.

Despondency: Loss of courage or hope; dejection.

Diathesis : An unusual constitutional susceptibility or predisposition to a particular disease.
d. rheumatic: Predisposition to rheumatism.
d. haemorrhagic : Predisposition to haemorrhage.

d, tubercular : Predisposition to tuberculosis.
d. scrofulous : Predisposition to glandular swellings especially in the neck.

Doctrine of signature : Belief that there were specific therapeutic essences, a cure for every
disease, to be found in plants, minerals or chemicals.

Diplopia: Double vision

Diurnal: Occurring during day.

Distortion: The State of being pushed out of normal shape or position.
Dysmenorrhoea: Menstruation so painful as to disable the lady from normal work.
Dyspepsia: Indigestion or upset stomach.

Dyspnoea: Difficult respiration.

Dyscrasia: Morbid state resulting from presence of toxic matter in blood.

Ecchymosis: Purplish patch due to extravasation of blood into the skin; black and blue spot.

Emaciation: Extreme loss of flesh.

Emphysema: Permanent dilation of pulmonary air vesicle.

Entreating: Appealing earnestly.

Enuresis: Incontinence of urine.

Epilepsy: A chronic nervous disorder with attacks of unconsciousness or convulsion or both.
Epistaxis: Nose bleed.

Erythism: Abnormal state of excitement or irritation either general or local.


744 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

——————————— en

Erethema: Redness of skin or superficial bluish.

Erysipelas: Acute inflammatory diseases with eruptions limited to skin and sharply defined.
Eructation: Belching.

Exaggeration: Overstatement.

Examination funk: A low depressd mood occurring before an examination.

Exanthemata: Skin eruption or rash occurring incertain infectious diseases like measles,
smallpox, etc.

Exanthema: Singular of exanthemata.

Exhalation: To breathe out.

Extremes of life: Childhood and old age.

Extravasation: Escape of blood or lymph from a vessel to other tissues.
Excrescence: Any outgrowth from surface.

Exostosis : Abnormal outgrowth of bone.

Exudation: Oozing out or discharge.

F

Fag : To work hard and become very tired as a result.
Fastidious : Choosy, not easy to please, very critical and discriminating.

Fatty degeneration : Formation of globules of fat in the cytoplasm from the cell, not
transported from other sites.

Felon : Whitlow or panaritium.
Fibrinous : Composed of fibrin, the clotting material.

Fistula : Pathologic sinus or abnormal passage from an abscess or from a hollow organ to
surface or from one organ to another.

Flatulence : Excessive accumulation of gas in stomach and intestine.
Foetid : Foul smelling.
Frigidity : Sexual coldness.

Funk : A low depressed mood appearing before an examination.

Gastritis: Inflammation of the gaster e.g. stomach.

Glairy mucus: Shining or glossy mucus.


Glossary 745

Gleet: Slight chronic discharge of thin muco-pus from urethra following gonorrhoea.
Globus hystericus: Sensation as if a ball in throat occurring in emotional attacks.
Gold headed cane patient: Fastidious person.

Gloomy: Very sad or dejected, hopeless and melancholic.

Glossary: A partial dictionary giving meaning of technical terms.

Griping: To cause sharp pain in the bowels, very distressing.

Grumous: Scrofulous.

Hallucination: False Imaginations.

Haematemesis: Vomiting of blood.

Haematuria: Presence of blood in urine.

Hemiopia: Loss of vision for one half of the visual field.

Haemoptysis: Spitting of blood.

Haemorrhoids: Piles, Varicose condition of the external haemorrhoidal veins causing
painful condition of anus.

Heart burn: Pyrosis or water brash.

Helminthiasis: Condition of having intestinal vermiform parasites.

Hemicrania: Migraine, Hemicephalia.

Herpes : A spreading eruption of deep seated vesicles on an erethematous base-h. simplex
and h. zoster.

Hernia: Protrusion of a part or an organ or other structure through wall of the cavity
normally containing it.

Hippocratic face: Face of a dying man as described by Hippocratis marked by emaciated
nose, etc.

Hilarity: Excessive mirth.

Headstrong: Determined not to follow order, advice, etc. but to do as he pleases.

Home-sickness: Longing for home and sickness for being away from home and family.

Hour glass contraction: Constriction in the middle Portion of a hollow organ, such as,
stomach or gravid uterus.

Hydrocele: Collection of serous fluid in a sacculated cavity, especially in tunica vaginalis of
testis.

Hydrocephalus: Excessive accumulation of fluid in the cerebral ventricles dilating these
cavities, thinning the brain, and causing separation of cranial bone.

Hydrophobia: Rabies in men. fear of water due to it.


746 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

ee SSSSSFFFe_._OOYy”

Hygroma: Cystic swelling containing serous fluid,, such as, cysitc lymphangioma,
hhousemaid’s knee, etc.

Hyperaemia: Presence of an increased amount of blood in a part; congestion.
Hyperemesis : Excessive vomiting.

Hypochondriace: Imagines that he suffers from a disease.

eo

Ichorous: A thin watery discharge from an ulcer or an unhealthy wound.

Icterus: Jaundice.

Illusion: A false perception; the mistaking of something for what it is not.
Incarcerated: Confined; imprisoned, e.g. an irreducible hernia.
Incipient: Just beginning to exist or to come to notice.

Indignation : Anger.

Indolent : Inactive; sluggish.

Inebriety: Drunkenness; intoxication.

Inimical : Unfavourable, unfriendly, harmful.

Irresolute: Wavering in decision, purpose or opinion; indecisive.
Ischuria : Retention or suppression of urine.

Intertrigo: Dermatitis occurring between two folds of the skin, such as, between the buttock
and thighs.

Intussusception : Invagination; the folding of one segment of the
intestine within another.
Inverted saucer : A turned up plate.

Involution: Return of an organ to its normal size after distension, as of the uterus after
childbirth.

Jovial : Gay; Joyful; Jolly.

Keloid: A new growth or tumour or skin consisting of whitish ridges, nodules and plaques of
dense tissue.

Keratitis : Inflammation of cornea.

Kerato-iritis : Inflammation of cornea and iris.


Glossary 747

L

Laceration : A wound produced by tearing of skins.

Lachrymation : Shedding of tears.

Lactation: (1) Secretion of milk.
(2) Period of secretion of milk.

Laparotomy : Surgical incision
(1) through abdominal wall.
(2) into the loin.
Lame: Stiff and very painful.
Lardaceous : Resembling lard.
Lassitude : A state or feeling of being tired.
Linen: The underpart of dress.
Lesion: Any hurt, wound or local degeneration.
Let’s up with a snap : Stops suddenly.

Leucoderma: An acquired condition with localised loss of pigmentation of the skin resulting
in abnormal whiteness.

Leucorrhoea: A whitish discharge from the vagina and uterine cavity.
Lienteria : Diarrhoea with passage of undigested food.

Linear spots : Discolouration of skin following dyspepsia.

Lock jaw: Inability to open the jaws as seen in tetanus.

Longing for : A strong desire for.

Locomotor ataxia : Total or partial inability, to co-ordinate voluntary bodily movements.
Loquacity : Excessive talkativeness.

Marrow: The soft, fatty substance filling up the medullary cavities and cancellous
extremities of the long bones.
Magnetized : To be rubbed.
Mania: (1) wild or violent mental disorder.
(2) An excessive craze for something.
a. Nymphomania : Extreme sexual desire in women.
b. Religios mania: Mania with abnormal religious impulses.
c. Peurperal maina: Mania which follows childbirth.
d. Satyriasis : Extreme sexual desire in men.
e. Lascivious mania : Mania characterised by expression of lust.



748 Text Book of MATERIA MEDICA

Marasmus : Extreme emaciation cV general atrophy occurring especially in young children
not due to any specific or obvious casuse, such as T.B.

Matrix : The formative portion of a nail or tooth.

Meningitis: Inflammation of the covering membranes of the brain and spinal cord.
Menorrhagia: Excessively profuse or prolonged menstruation.

Mesmerism : To be hypnotised.

Metastasis: The shifting of a disease or its local manitestation from the part of the body to
another as seen in mumps when parotid gtena heals, testes becomes affected.

Metrorrhagia : Irregular, acyclic bleeding from uterus, particularly between periods.

Miasm: An inborn or acquired state, peculiar to an individual which predisposes him to a
disease, group of diseases or mental condition.

Micturition: Urination.
Milestones of life : Significant or importants event in the career of a person.

Miller’s asthma : Catarrhal inflammation of the larynx in children, accompanied by, night
attacks of spasmodic closure of the glottis, causing inspiratory stridor.

Mole : Pigmented naevus. A congenital neoplasm.

Mortification: Shame, humiliation, chagrin, etc. something causing shame.

Moth spot : Discolouration of skin due to hepatic or uterine cause or exposure to sun’s heat.
Mouldy : Stale musty smell.

Mucous membrane : The mucous coat in the internal parts of the body such as mouth,
intestine, urethra, anus, vagina, etc.

Murmur: A soft sound, like that made by a somewhat forcible expiration with the mouth
open, heard on auscultation of the heart, lungs’ or blood vessels. Also used for a variety of
other than soft sounds which may be loud, harsh or frictional.

Systolic m. One heard during systole.
Diastolic m. One heard during diastole.

Musty: Having a stale or mouldy smell as in a closed room.

UN |

Naevus: Congenital lesion or discoloured patch of the skin.
Necrosis: Death of a cell as the result of diease or injury.

Narcotic : Producing stupor or sleep.

Neuralgia : Pain in a nerve.

Nodosity : A swelling, node or protuberance.

Noxious effluvia : Hurtful to health or injurious smell.


Glossary 749

Numbness : Deprived of the power of feeling, insensible.

Nystagmus : Continuous rolling movement of eyeballs.

Obesity: An abnormal increase of fat in the subcutaneous connective tissues. Fatness,
corpulence.

Oedema : Dropsy, Pathological accumulation of fluid in tissue spaces.

Old toper : A person long used to regular drinking.

Onanism : Masturbation.

Oozing : Flowing or leaking outslowly.

Opthalmia neonatorum : Purulent severe inflammation of eyes of the new born.
Opisthotonos: Tetanic spasm which flexes the head and feet backward.
Orchitis : Inflammation of the testis.

Otorrhoea : A muco-purulent discharge from the ear.

Ozaena: A foul odour present in certain cases of atrophic syphilitic and other forms of chronic
rhinitis.

P

Panaritium : Felon; whitlow.
Paraplegia : Paralysis of both the lower extremities.

Paralysis: Partial or complete loss or temporary interruption of normal function of some part
of body.

Paresis : Partial paralysis.
Paronychia : Felon; whitlow.

paroxysm: A sudden attack or intensification of the symptoms of a disease usually occurring
periodically.

Parturition : Giving birth to a child.

Pearly : Like a pear] as in colour or lustre.

Pemphigus: A disease marked by formation of bullae which after absorption, leave
pigmentary spots.

Pertusis : Whooping cough.

Phlebitis : Inflammation of vein.

Phagadena: An ulcer that rapidly spreads peripherally destroying tissues as it increases in
area.


Phlegmonous: Denoting inflammation of subcutaneous tissues.

Physometra : Passage of air from the vagina.

Phlyctenula : Small red nodule of lymphoid cells, with ulcerated apex, on conjunctiva.
Pining boys: Boys who have wasted away through grief, pain, longing, etc.

Piteous moaning: Groaning or expressing low mournful sound of sorrows attracting pity.

Plethoric habit: An abnormal condition due to increase of blood in the circulatory system or
in some part of it resulting in a state of being too full.

Plica-polonica : Matting of hair with crusts and vermin.

Pneumogastric nerve : Vagus nerve; Tenth cranial nerve.

Pollution : Discharge of semen, either voluntary or involuntary, other than during coitus.
Polypus : A morbid growth from a mucus membrane.

Pot bellied : Person with abdomen resembling a round shaped pot.

Precocious : Prematurely developed in mind.

Priapism : Persistent erection of the penis.

Prolapsus: Falling down of an organ on other part from its normal position.

” recti: Falling down or dropping of the rectum.

Prosopalgia : Trigeminal neuralgia.

Prostration : Utter physical or mental exhaustion.

Pruritus vulvae: Itching of the external genitalia in the female.

Pseudo membranous : Development of false membrane.

Psoriasis : Skin disease of many varieties, characterized by scaly red patches.
Ptyalism : Salivation.

Ptosis : Droopping of the upper eyelids.

Ptomaine poisoning: Poisoning through decayed food materials; Food poisoning.
Puerperal : Relating to the period usualy six weeks after childbirth.

Puberty: Age at which reproductive organs become developed—18 to 16 years in boys and 12
to 14 years in girls.

Puffy: Swollen; fat and obese.
Putrescence : Rottenness; putridity.

Ss

Sapraemia: A form of blood poisoning caused by toxic products of micro-organism.

Sanguinous: Bloody; plethoric; abounding in blood.


Glossary 



Scald : A burn caused by a hot liquid or hot moist vapour.

Scirrhus: Hard cancer with predominance of fibrous tissue.

Scrofulous: A glandular swelling which predisposes to tuberculosis.

Scurf: Dandruff; branny desquamation.

Sclerosis: Induration or hardening of chronic inflammatory origins; jnduration with hypertrophy of connective tissue.

Scrawny: 1. Very thin, skinny and bony.
         2. Stunted or scrubby.

Sebaceous: The gland which secretes the substance whose ducts open into hair follicles.

Secundine: The after Urth, or the placenta.

Septicaemia: A morbid condition due to presence or reproduction of pathologic bacteria in the blood.

Serous membrane: The lining membrane of any one of the, great splanchnic or lymph cavities.

Sedentary habits: Inactive habits.

Shattering: Run down: broken down.

Shingles: Herpes zoster.

Similimum: That which is most similar in nature, character and action.

Slimy: Slippery.

Somnambulism: Habitual walking in sleep.

Snappish: Cross or irritable; uncivil.

Snuffles: Catarrhal discharge from the nasal mucous membrane in infants.

Somersault: Turning the body one full revolution with heels over head.

Sneaking: Cowardly; secret; underhand.

Sopor: Deep sleep.

Sordes: Foul matter collected on lips and teeth in low fevers.

Spermatorrhoea: An involuntary discharge of semen, without orgasm.

Stasis : Stagnation of blood or other fluid.

Stercoraceous: Consisting of, or contain faeces.

Staining linen: Making the towel dirty with faeces or urine,

Strangury: Difficulty in micturition; slow and painful discharge of urine

Stupor: Partial or nearly complete unconsciousness,

Strangling: Killing by squeezing the throat with hands nose, etc., causing suffocation or choking in any manner.

Strumous: Scrofulous; goitrous.


Styes: Inflammation of one of the sebaceous glands of the eyelids.

Sulky: Gloomy; dismal; sullen.

Sunken: 1. Submerged. 2. Depressed. 3. Below the base of the surrounding or adjoining area,

Suppuration: Formation of, conversion into, or discharge of pus.

Sub-sultus tendinum : Twitching movement of muscles

and tendons in typhoid condition.

Suture: 1. Surgical stitch or seam.

2. Line of junction of adjacent cranial or facial bones.

Swashing sensation : Sensation as of washing with splashing of water or the sound of this.

Swarthy: Having a dark complexion; dusky.


Synchronous: Occurring at the same time.


Sycosis menti: Pustular folliculitis of the beard; barber’s itch.



Tabes dorsalis : Loco-motor ataxia.

Taciturn : Almost always silent, not liking to talk.

Tachycardia : An abnormally fast, rapid heartbeat,

Tell-tale face: Outward indication on face on the internal condition of health.

Temperament : One’s customary form or natural disposition,

(a) Bilious t. : In which it is marked by more or less general pigmentation, high blood
presssure, slow pulse, well developed muscle, strong appetite and tenacityl of
purpose.

(b) Choleric t. : Bilious t.

(c) Nervous t. : In which the subject is mentally, and physically alert, with, rapid pulse, excitability, but not having always fixity of purpose.

(d) Leucophlegmatic t. : In which there is pallor of skin slow and shallow respiration, sluggish circulation and a tendency to inflammation of skin and lymphatics; sameas scrofulous diathesis.

(e) Lymphatic t. : Same as leucophlegmatic t.

(f) Sanguine t, : Which has a fresh complexion; light hair and eyes; a full pulse, good
digestion, and a quick but not lasting temper.

(g) Melancholic t : One marked by emaciation, irritability, and a pessimistic out look
on the world.

Tenacios : That clings, touch, adhesive, sticky.

Tettery eruption : Any of various skin diseases, such as eczema, characterised by itching.


Glossary 753

Titillating : That which gives a sensation of tickling.

Tonicity : Normal condition of tone or tension.

Tonic : Characterised by continuous tension

Tormenting : Great pain or anguish, physical or menial suffering.

Tornado : A violently whirling column of air extending downward from cloud.
Torpid : Inactive or sluggish in functioning.

Too ugly to live: Utter dislike of one’s own life.

Transudation : Passage of fluid through a membrane in the surrounding tissue.
Trauma : A bodily injury, wound or shock.

Trifles: Something of little value or importance; a trivial thing.

Trismus: Tetanic spasm of the muscles of jaw.

Tympanitic condition: A condition like drum or drum head.

Typhoid state : A condition of weakness, feeble pulse, and low-delirium, characterstic in
typhoid.

U

Unweildy: Awkward shape or form. far”

* Urticaria: (Hives or nettle-rash). A skin disease marked by transient eruption of wheats.

id

Vaginismus : Painful Spasm of the vagina due io local hyperaesthesia. ‘

Varicocele A Enlargement of the veins of the spermattc cord
Varicose vein: A greatly enlarged and, controled vein.
Variola: Small-pox. : .
Vertigo: Giddiness or dizziness. - : ‘ .

Vicarious menstruation; Habitual monthly discharge from a substituted way and
abnormal situation; such acceding from nose.

Vice versa: The order or relation being reversed; conversely.
Virgin : A woman or gir] who has had no sexual intercourse,
Virulent : Extremely ‘heinous or injurious. ‘

Voluptuogs itching: The itch which excites the sexual desire,
Vomitus : Matter that has been vomited.


754 - Jeavbuth Un cAI wicDICA

w |

Water brash: Burning sensation in the oesophagus and stomach with sour eructation.
Wart: A small usually hard, tumorous growth on the skin.
Wrath : Intense anger, rage, fury.

Y.

Yielding: Flexible; submissive.

Zymotic diseases : Any disease due. to or causing fermentation; an infectious disease.

Cansinosin Th a a, a
fan 2 fave tebe
Appratena Blue Scle nots une Cros}

z 1

Az “heel tet Se Symre ¢ *

In prm+ = Dpsorrhen ers

i = Audesis Genin phd)
C = Conspipation y

2k
Re Reference 4, From “tobe D =Diebebs

A * Anemia C= Ca ncee
Te Taberculrsy s
ngtd hasta ay Ac Ania
{ 2 Deri hl
7) « Unhapr pase
F = Feng
F * Frit

———— ee

C= Charetur
b4 prp nee
a


Te Inf Anmmactory Myers in prt
Recurrent Fever
Pneumont's

Wihopls cour

Nz Neetrnal *g <

O= Offers < Eeot cast
7 Scuth Cooat

$4] Kenee-
ep _ the pospon
L+yeo
Sleep om bouek. lack head (puts)

| = Snnsom nin wi) Thowt Pepeary
Shoat nop flee beltve—

N= Nepabie Mbanatin f Symons
- Eartidjeun % iki

Crawi
FoFat ] donee
E> XG] Ayamen
me Milka

57s
