
--- Page 1 ---
'

We have nothing to add to Hahnemann’s own preface,
except that we have used the utmost fidelity ahd attention in
transcribing this volume. We have added the nosological
portion of the new work of Messrs. Noack and Trinks, for
the benefit of those who are not acquainted with the German
language. The symptoms which are enclosed in brackets,
like these [ ], have been furnished to Hahnemann by other
provers.

The second volume of the Materia Medica Pura will ap-
pear in a few weeks. ;

CH. J. HEMPEL, M.D.
93 Spring-street.
New- York, Dec, 26, 1845.


--- Page 2 ---
PREFACE.

I rorpear writing a criticism of the existing systems and
modes of preparation of remedial agents. Physicians imagine,
although in vain, that they can judge of the remedial virtues
of medicinal agents by their color, taste, and smell; they sup-
pose they can extract those virtues by distillation or subli-
mation, in the shape of phlegma, ethereal oils, pungent acids
and oils, volatile salts; or, from the caput mortuum, they
imagine they can extract alkalis and earths almost by the
same processes ; or, agreeably to the modern method, they
dissolve the soluble parts of those substances in different liquids,
inspissate the extracts, or add many kinds of reagents, for the
purpose of extracting resin, gum, gluten, starch, wax, and al-
bumen, salts and earths, acids and alkaloids, or converting
the substances into gases. We know that, in spite of all these
violent transformations, the medicinal substances never showed
the remedial virtues which each of them possesses; the ma-
terial extracts did not embody the curative power which the
respective medicinal substances are capable of exercising in
every special case of disease; as that power cannot be pre-
sented in a tangible form, but can only be recognized by its
effects in the living organism,

The day of the true knowledge of remedies, and a true
system of therapeutics, will dawn when physicians shall
abandon the ridiculous method of mixing together large por-
tions of medicinal substances whose remedial virtues are only
known speculatively, or by vague praises, which is in fact not
to know them at all ; and when they shall no longer use
mixtures for the cure of diseases without having even


--- Page 3 ---
vi PREPACE.

nutely inquired into their respective symptoms. In our com-
mon treatises on pathology, diseases are arbitrarily named and
described; and, by treating them with the compound fabrics*
_of common doctors, in accordance with their mere names and
vaguely described general forms, the physician never knows
which of the remedial agents was either hurtful or beneficial ;
nor has he an opportunity of becoming more intimately ac-
quainted with the curative power of cach single remedy.
The day of the true knowledge of remedies, and a true
stem of therapeutics, will dawn when physicians shall
abandon the systems and opinions which have heretofore
swayeil the minds of the profession ; when they shall act upon
the principle that every single medicinal substance is capable
of curing a case of disease, the symptoms of which shall be
exactly analogous to those which the medicinal substance is
capable of producing upon a healthy organism.
Among the symptoms which have been furnished to me
by other physicians, and which will be mentioned together
with my own, there are some which have been observed upon

* As long ne physicians are not convinced of the obvurdity of their
methods, they muy continue sending their compound prescriptions to the
pharmacy. They need not, for that parpose, know the correct and com-
plete nature of every ingredient; and even if they did, that know!
would be of no avieil on af ten cclldiogeaahel rows tagre
enté being necessarily different from the individual action of each.

This method is what they call treating a disease ; and they will con-
tinue this kind of treatment until the wpirit of reform shall excite in their
hearie a d of ching disease, A cure, however, can only be accom-
Plishod by single romodion.

‘Phe genuine vetion of every medicinal eubetance may be ascertained
by experiments, Exporience alone can toll o# whether a remedial ugent
has a specific curative power ina given case of disense, ~

What conscientious man would be willing to weil the tottering life
of the patient with remedies which are capuble of exercising a prejudi-
cial and even destructive effect, without having a minute knowledge of
their inherent virtues 7 No carpenter works with tools which he is not
acquainted with; he haw a correet knowledge of every tool and knawa
exnetly when and where he ought to employ it, in order to Aocompliah
his work with certainly and precivion. And, neverthelews, this man
works only in wood, and is a mere carpenter ! al


--- Page 4 ---
PREFACE. vii

sick persons. However, inasmuch as these persons were
chronic patients, and their morbid symptoms had beer well
ascertained, care has been taken, at any rate by Greding, to
distinguish thes: standing symptoms from the syarptoms pro- .
duced by the medicine, Symptoms discovered upon such pa-
tients are, therefore, not without some value, and may, abany
rate, serve to confirm analogous of the sume symptoms when
found upon healthy ‘persons.

To those experiments which have been made by me and my
disciples, every care has been taken to secure the true and full
action of the meédicines, Our trials have heen’ made upon
persous enjoying perfect health, and living in contentment and
comparative ease. 7

When an extraordinary ciccumstance of any kind, fright,
chagrin, fear, external injuries, the excessive enjoyment of any
one pleasure, or some great, important event, supervened during
the trial, then no symptom has been recorded after such an
event, in order to prevent spurious symptoms being noted as
genuine. - "

When that circumstance was of no importance, and could
not be supposed to interfere with the action of the medicine,
then the symptoms have been placed in brackets, for the pur-
pose of informing the reader that they could not be considered
decisively genuine. :

As regards the duration of action which I have noted after
every medicine chosen for trial, I may here observe, that I
arrived at the possibility of determining it, by a great number
of experiments upon healthy persons ; this jon will, there-
fore, either be longer or shorter in proportion as the disease is,
more or less acute or chronic; if the medicine is given in too
large doses, of is not homeopathic to the disease, then the du-
nition Which | have pointed out eannot be considered normal,
In both these last eases the duration is considernbly less; for
the medicine is expelled, and its remedial virtue destroyed, by
subsequent evacuations, bleeding from the nose, hemo
catarth, flow of urine, diarrhan, vomiting, sweat. The living
organism resorts to similar modes of évacuation in regard to
the minasm of cortagious diseases, which is weakened and


--- Page 5 ---
viii PREFACE.

partially expelled by vomiting, diarrhaa, hemorrhages, catarrh,
convulsions, ptyalism, sweat, and similar processes, by which
the organism tries to free itself from the poison. This explains
the reason why the ordinary practice should not have suc-
ceeded in discovering either the true nature, or the duration of
the effects of tartar emetic or jalap; all these substances are
given in such large doses, that the organism is induced to re-
act against them, and to expel them in the shortest possible
period. Only when this reaction does not take place, and the
remedies remain in the system, as it is expressed in common
language, the true action of the medicinal substance takes
place, and often manifests itself by important and long-con-
tinuing symptoms, which, however, have been seldom correctly
observed and noted.

The vomiting which is consequent upon two or three grains
of tartar emetic, or twenty grains of ipecacuanha; the purg-
ing which is induced by thirty grains of jalap, and the sweat
excited by a decoction of a handful of juniper- are
much less the genuine effects of these substances than an
endeavor, on the part of the organism, to annihilate, in the
shortest possible period, the specific effects of those medicinal
substances.

The reason why the hommopathic doses have such an un-
commonly powerful effect, is this: that the organism is not
obliged to expel them in the same sudden and violent manner
as the large doses prescribed by all@opathic physicians. And
even those small doses, if they are not strictly homaopathic,
invite nature to artificial evacuations, which shorten the action

_ of the remedy.

In my Organon of the healing art, 1 teach the principle
that diseases can only be cured by remedies which produce
analogous symptoms upon the healthy organism, and I more-
over assert and prove, that every system of therapeutics, in
order to become a safe guide in the treatment of disease, onght
to exclude all empty assertions and conjectures, as regards the
supposed virtues of medicines, and ought to furnish a correct
description of the symptoms by which remedial agents mani-
fest their action upon the healthy organism. Any one who


--- Page 6 ---
PREFACE. ix
admits the truth of these positions, will gladly seize the means
which I here offer him, of relieving the affections of mankind
in a speedy, durable, and much more certain manner.

This is not the place to show how the selection of a reme-
dy, whose symptoms are analogous to the symptoms of a
given case of disease, should be made. This may be studied
in the Organon, which also contains the necessary directions
in regard to the mode in which the homeopathic doses should
be exhibited.

To exercise its full curative action, a hommopathic dose
may be chosen of the highest degree of potency.

The symptoms of those remedies which have been studied
with more care, have been arranged in a certain order. This
facilitates the finding of the desired symptom. Among similar
symptoms of different remedies, some ought to have been
pointed out as parallel passages. My time did not permit me
to attend to this.

The symptoms have been arranged in the following order :

VERTIGO,

OsnvBiLaTion,

Derecrs or THe Mrnp,
Derecrs or tur Memory,
Heapacue, internal, external,
Forensan, Harr,

Face,

,Eves ayp Sion,

Ears, Heancna, (articulation of the jaw,)
Nose, Smeu,

Livs,

Cun,

Lower Jaw, (glands of the lower jaw,)
Teera,

Tonaur, (defects of speech,)

Sauiva,

Tnnoat,

Puanynx, esophagus,

Taste,

Exavcrarions, heart-burn, hiccough,


--- Page 7 ---
x PREFACE.

Nausea, vomiting, ‘
Desiree or nating and drinking,* hunger,
Prr or rar Sromacn, stomach,
Apnpomes, Erraasrrivm, Reeton or THE Liven, Hy- »
yocronpiiac Reet,
Hyrocasrrium,
Lumar Resiox,t '
Urnrus,
Anpomixat Riya,
Reerum, Anus, Perrnxum,
Sroat,
Unive, Buaporn, Unwrnaa,
‘Genarran OnGans,
 Sexvan Isstinct,

Gexeravive Facuuty, Errvstox or Semen,
ALVCON REE,
Sye Coup, Caranan, Hoarseness,

‘Coven,

Breath,

Cicer,

Morion or Tee Heart,

Recion oy ree Suman. or Tue Back, Lumpan Ver-
TRORA,

Back,

Scaruns,

Narre ov rae Necx,

Necx,}

SHovinens,

Arms, Hanps,

Hires, Pervis,

NateEs,

Turons, Leos, Peer.

* Thirst ie sometimes mentioned after hiccough; sometimes it will be
found under the head of fever.

+ This how sometimes been annexed to the symptom of the
the lumbar vertebrn. ih iy me

} The symptoms of the neck are sometimes mentioned after those of
the lower jaw ‘


--- Page 8 ---
PREFACE. x!

Common Arrecrions of the body and the skin,
Comruawwrs is tur Ores At,
“Exuatation, Temreratcre or tHe Bopy,
Laastrry to Couns, Srnains, Panoxysus,
Spasms, Panavysis, Weaxnnss, Swoor,
Yawsine, Steerixess, Suomeen, Surer, Niawriy Con:
rtainrs, Dreams,
Feven, Cutts, Heat, Swear,
Aweauisn, Paurrrarion op tue Heant,* Uneasiness,
‘Tremon,t
Citaners ocevnainea 1s tre Frecines, Arvecrions or
tae Sout.
SAMUEL HAHNEMANN.
Coethen, January, 1830. |

* That kind of pulpit of the heart 1 which’
anxiety, will be found mentioned amang the affections of the chest.
+ Those kinds of uncasiness and tremor, which are simply bodlity,
and do not affect the mind, will be ly found réborded «
the «ymptoms of the extromities, the goneral affwetions of the
body.
mn a « e
HOMCEOPATHIC MEDICINE.

Reso pec No. wine agen Aro New-Yorle, ue
Agent for t omeropathic Pharmacy at Leipuic,
ane States, respectfully Peavy the Homeopathic Physicians and
the friends of the aystem, thut he has alwoys on hand a good assort-
ment of HOMEOPATHIC MEDICINES. in complotes sets A rain
gle vials, in Tinctures, Dilutions, and Triturations ; also P

of Medicines; Physicians’ and Family Medicine ‘Chosts, 1 Tae’ rt
Domestic (59 remedies), Epps (4 eae stg Hering AS remedies),
Small pocket cases at 84, with Family Guide and 27 remedies.
Cuses containing 415 vials, with Mother Tinctures and “Triuration,
for Physicians ; eases with 176 vials of tinctures and ‘T'riturations
tw Jnhr's Manual, in 2 vols, Pocket cases with 60 vinls of Tinc-
tures and ‘Triturations. aoe from 200-400 vials with Jow and high

dilutions of medicated 3 cases from 50-89 vials of low and high
dilutions, ete., ete Sugar of Mik, pure Globules, ete. ; as
well os Books, Pamphlets, orks on the System, in

the English, French, and German languages.


--- Page 9 ---
LIST OF REMEDIES
CONTAINED LN THIS VOLUME,

Aconrrum Napettus ....2......2..--: Fe
Amana AmBROSTACA .......-.-.-.2- Jseweeccaapnes” ome
AWOUSTUBR Sn oe ce io cae conse es ae _ wor Ot
Arnica Montana .........-.-. vans-amipeivicimacsinee® 61
ARSENIO? ooo cron cas butaueee es seieasewee Brace anace ass 83
Aner Boer m0w 2 oo ac a oa cc caeccssuesesesewess 83
Bet MUA wins ccevesieccbessneae saneeaeasress 95
+ a shi a-nescnn tine enna ces ome 147
TN gen ee a cee ba vr. UM 152
i Campmor ..... wnwesnesedicsreceseceoncecoe esccens 185
PP CaM DRVA <= soon sea vcésniuicsesenss ccavae AO
Capsicum Annvum ....... Be caiacsunte acdsee se 210

* Note. Several of the anti-psorics had been originally introduced
‘by Hahnemann into the Materia Modica Pura ; at that time Hahne-
mann had not yet discovered shep-atth:pecnianeterre-of home remedies.
Afterwards, when this discovery had been made, those anti.psorics

. were tried more minutely, and together with the other anti.psorics were
published as a separate collection under the name of “ Chronic Dis-
eases,” ‘The first proving of these remedies contained in the Matoria
Medica Pura, has been omitted in the translation, and only the results
the second proving have been given to the American reader, which

uch more complete.

“The remedies which have been thus proved over again, are the
following: Duleamara, Causticum, Arsenic, Digitalis, Aurum,
Gusjacum, Sarsaparilla, Sulphur, Calcarea acetata, Muriatic acid,
sss pay Manganum, Carbo, Colocynthis, Stannum.

) HEMPEL.


--- Page 10 ---
MATERIA MEDICA PURA.

ACONTTUM NAPELLUS.

Mowksnoov.—Tho juice of the fresh plant, expreseed on the first a)
pearance of flowering, sind mixed with an equal quantity of alcohol. A

Aurnovern the following symptoms do not by any means
—— all the medicinal power of this precious plant, they
will, nevertheless, furnish the ious practitioner the means
of judgin pew is be’ may be 2 ul ue past ees of disease,
aginst wi e practice up to ha: time,
employed, often in ee saa almost afwute with injurious con-
sequences, its dangerous resources ; such as, copious emissions
of blood, and others peculiar to what is the antiphlogistic
treatment, °

I_would speak of fevers, called purely inflammatory; in
which the smallest dose of Aconite, wahout recourse to any of
the remedies acting in an antipathie manner, causes a prompt
removal of the inflammatory action, and leaves no consecutive
effects behind. In measles, heen ni ee
tory fevers with pleurisy, &., the y of this plant amounts
almost to a miracle; provided the patient observes a regimen
somewhat cooling, abstains from all other a sub-
stanves, as well as able acids, takes it alone and in the
dose of the thousandth part of » drop of the thirtieth dilution.

It seldom. happens that a second dose necessary at the
connie Pay six Se Sony a ees. ut to guard our con-
scientious method from all possibility of influence from the

cepts of the common practice, which is but too prone to be
govemed by names of diseases often imaginary, it is necessary


--- Page 11 ---
F} ACONITUM NAPELLUS,,

that the primary morbid affection, to, whieh we would oppo
Aconite, shonld exhibit, in the aggregate of its principal symp-
toms, a striking analogy with those of the remedy. Then we
obtain results truly surprising. ' . t

It is precisely in the cases in which the partisans of allao- —
pathy pride themselves most on their method; it is in the
violent acute inflammatory fevers, where they expect to save
their patients alone by excessive and frequent bloo .
and thereby exceed so far the powers of hommopathy, that they
most y deceive Manatee Here, more than ever, in
fact, homeopathy exhibits her universal superiority ; for she
has no for shedding a drop of that precious fluid, of
which allaopat y is so dangerously profuse, in order to triumph
over those ogi. aa seniors health, oie Roan chapel
hours as the ordinary practice requires months, completely to
reestablish those whom their violent remedies have not, it is
true, conducted to the tomb, but have left a prey to those
chrovic sufferings which are their tatural consequenee.

It is sometimes necessary, in these acute digenses, to have
recourse to another hommopathie remedy to cover the symp-
toms which remain afier aconite has acted twelve or sixteen
pas but it is rarely necessary to administer a fresh doxe of

To giving Aconite with these precautions,in the affections
of whith Voie jatoode el sneer wll we passed atthe
to hour to calm balance which may.
habitually characterize it. 4

Although, from the short duration of its action, (which in
so feeble a dose does not go beyond forty-eight hours,) Aconite
appesr to be useful only in acute cases, still itis nota less
mlixpensable remedy in the most obstinate chronic affections ;
in those in which the state of the body requires a diminution
of what is called rigidity of fibre—a subject on which I cannot
here enlarge. Its efficacy in by eaere will be seen in the
pare re ey “so healthy individual,

“Aconite is equally the first and most powerful of the cara-
tive means in ¢ in several kinds of angina, ae well as in
the acute local tions of other parts of the body ;
especially when with thirst and a frequent pulse, we meet wine
a tossing from side to side in great agony.

Tt produces all the morbid states which are manifested in
persons whose minds have been excited by fear, joined: with

‘


--- Page 12 ---
ts a

-

yh fonto NAPELLS. 3

rics ee jane it is atso the surest meno cing them

‘ opty ay seat athic reme-

7 ty agi how which ely
eatamenia ; for without this

cobirartion precious
galmer, it i ‘often, that they sufi
r ral shocks: Joie oats | eae

this will preserve its virtue for some years without
pret et learge wala it
to
contradictory, which will be noticed hereafter, are but
alternate states, and Aconite may be salutary in the one as well
as in the other, though principally so in those of a tonic

Vegetable acids and acpi the effectsof Aconite, and
20 do other remedies, whic vagal epetenye 7: or cape

rae see to the untoward symptoms w someti¢nes
use wisest mens Sega bates or it has not been
homeopathically chose
to sina end Trinks, Aconite may be used in

the Pa ah Predominant action of the arterial
M Seed ut retarded action of the venous system,
characterized -—Aconite is especially suitable
to individuals of a plethoric habit, lively character, bilioso-
nervous or sanguineous constitution, dark hair, Cole com-
lexion, and to to ald coplo.— Active congestions of blood to the
train, fate; heart aid Iungs.—Virulent Aemorrhages
foon various organs ent inflammations of external and
internal organs, with lancinating and synochal fever. —
secede nen, reac shar, alate
toms co vent rig anger agrin, t
eahitentes tish in the oon of the blood and the mons
of the liver—Bilious affections, rset) oo akin as
rosa pager with synochal fever.

during a cold,

air—Great li lity to fess Asa: corbins e
rash followed by dropsy, with feverish symptoms ;
herpetica; lichen simplex.—Rubeola, measles with synochal
fever, photophobia, catarrhal inflammation of the eyes, cold,


--- Page 13 ---
4 ACONITUM NAPELLUS:

nia.—Searlatina leerade and miliaris
chal fever—Variola, varioloid, and pom 7
x eR fever, especially during the re este Brg
laeve and fugax, also bu
mercuriale—Cmista lactea?—-Synocha = Teka
shakin oe ee Jonge Seer sk afterwards
neral, - ing hea a
Eccelersted pulte, y thirst, follow pe a jae ry
copious seat Synochal fevers, with catarrhal, rheumatic,
acehnitiey erysipelatous: conditions, also with a tendency a
bilious nervousness.— First stage of cerebral and abdominal
ty us, with synochal symptoms—Third stage of cholera,
the vascular system seems to be engaged in a state of
violent, unequal, congestive reaction.—Pest, on the day of its
2 hapaertee with a violént, buming heat, somnolence, ete—
cute rheumatiam with synochal fever, stiffness of the whole
body, swelling of the joints and excessively violent. pains,
Sool rheumatism of the joints. —Aente arthritis, with

fever. Noa ‘onvulsions of children, with
Satent congestion of blood to the head—Hysteric convul-
sions vent fright-—Chronic spasms, especially in

ous e who lead a sedentary life, particulas} itls of a
ine ie eas —"Trismus ‘Teams ?--Cata
sa Lan drt of a plethoric habit—Parniing

PS wis | hee ulat and considerable
congestion ef blood to a tai ach raceme

Sonnambnlisn? Dement, with approheniion’ of death and
great Wet wee if hosts—Melancholin, especially

moria, erotica and athymin melancholica——Congestion of
blood fo the head, Fon combined with vertigo, in
children during the period of dentition ; in ere people

it is a valua prevetitive against apo ven,—
asda een oe upen congestion blood to es heed
acta to eatarthal and nervous Rone Nae ence:
litis, also when owing to a metastasis; acute meningitis of
children, first stage. hithalmia, of a catarthal, theumatiec,
arthritic, scrofulous, ilitie nature, cups 7 Lebeca che-
mosis has set in; inflammation of the eyes front having
penetrated into the es; ophthalmia neonatorum—Ble-
pharophthalmitis ica -— Otitis —Bleeding at the so,
of a virulent especially in children and in young peo

Of ie SOF Pe ecven yon eso in dechin at haga

ating, dra
Sir th theod gota: head and fae’ co welt coe


--- Page 14 ---
o ~~ yy
« ‘+

¥ 7 ~®, ; 4
3 -
« scontron NAPEite. 5

of we
ree geen es

irritation—Difiicult
a 5 of blood to the head, fal ana ir

excitemen ssitis—Slight catarrhal inflam-
mation of the tonsils, soft palate, and pharynx, consequent
upon & spring or autumn ce Vomiting of pregnant or hys-
‘of the stomach ; inflammation of the stomach ?—I
tion of the " of the liver, with a
lancinating, burning tly inflammation
convex: of the liver, synochal Siver*Teundicex
Prritonitis, also puerperal pen shitieGiclie" aes a. cold—
Enteritis, inft onrcodg ireal tone large and small intestines,
with lanci ieiieuee npn and tearing pains, with ex-
chdsive anneitivarieas of ths Uodly to the touch ; in in this affection

Aconite is often yot usefal after yori of fecal matter,
; sos, an coldness af the or exteiies have st in—

Psoitis.—Strangulated hernim—Ne hnritis—Cystitis —S uppu-
ration of the biadder—Metena ?— hemorrhoids of a
violent kind ; Senge Set varices we fe rectum. — itis —
Uteritis, in a plethoric —Active

bso ac ee ‘ameblg long, and copious menses,
2 genre restoration ot the menses in ernie
fema they had been eT ei kat
cold pedis nent and dry coryza w
Inflammation of coher and re oe ensewene of the
trachea, with a a whess, with roughness
and hoarseness of the voice, en ary cough, owing to
tickling in the larynx, and by synochal fever.—
Grippe : Cory titilla-

Sere onlkcote tetividunla es'anes as are affected with:
norhea.—Asthma Millari ?—He ysis with cor

te Du dvsdinae eet ai rims gam
tt opp att

py drab kates vertigo, obscuration of sight,

hard, full pulse, etc—Hemoptysis owing to tuberculous


--- Page 15 ---
. ACONITUM NAPELEUS, ,
thisic=Pleuritis ‘museiitarts, wil serosa, first périod
ir violerit stitches aid synochal feyer— —Pneumonia, |
eumonia simpler and biliosa, first. pee oe dull

w, great dyspnera, unceasing
torations of foamy blood and violent synoch ; also in
yore stage of eplevetization — Inflammation of the wally and

tb of the vormiom, with lancinating pains and
<P Pneiiabiia infantum, with a short, rattling Sonim

irritation, exciting cough, constant cries Feta anxious

lange ese in angitia poetoris, othe ea,
with either ate is fe hy
the aorta, ete.—Acouite and Digitalis are especially suitable for
diseases of the left heart—Paralysis ?—Rheumatic paralysis ?
Sen fig ae, vi gon Se sui.
1 cs us. Sulp.
¢. Croc. Dule, bv ace. 8 im.
Phosp. Rut. Sulp. Verat—3. Agar. Anac. Ant. er, Asa f.
Asar. Cann, Carb, an. Cast Coif. Coleh. Dros. Helleb, Hop.
conde sgh se ne mur. Nitr. ac, Plat, Sab, Spong. Stram.
ae Ls Vertiaay sande neem to and fro in the
Vertigo, riht (0 30 in bras See sagsering,
h. Verge all turing roun
her (a. 37 /h. Vert
vai eidity Wa! tice bad res not be moved ; ‘Beate
+a

; Staggers when walking, almost to falling, with nausea
there is no vertigo erailine (a ppecreetirai
and less when walking. (a. ¢ Vertigo ; very much increas-
ed by shaking the be re hy ons eyes to see black.

and dizziness, V. 5 vortiginous weight in the
head, especially in the forehead, and in stooping forward ; with
Fenigenn 10. Vorton eatiaa vt arene us ini {a. 2h.)
ertigo.— zo, asthma cough, in the
hips. Vertiginous obseu of vision vethout alteration of the
Vertigo and headache ; not affected by strong exercise,
ath.) Vertigo and headache, before and od; both worse
n stooping. (a, 1m.) His Devenir hie seca? '
frequent arrest of thought, when reading or writing. Ocea
sional obliteration of thought; in writing down the thought


--- Page 16 ---
he caonot reach the end without first nee himself—
15. His head feels asif a board were pressing the fore-

ja
| What has been Geartehetecs ties dscom,ane

rth use wars like a dream,
ite evarealy bs verntlectad pws cosh darnege? (0.5 and

z
i

e
sure in the temples. Stupef headache as if the head were

=
;
2
g
=
i
Ps
+
e

as if the must fall out. (2. 4h.) Headache, as if the
Sei ween’ ponmeicig: Out a. +h.) Hoadac as if parts of the
brain were raised up, w is i by

ment, even by drinking and (a. + h.)—35. Speaking
increases headache. La " as
from an internal abscess, preventing one from talk-

Headache in the forehead when wa

fine stitches, or bea ve pains ; subsides when sitting
Small pulsations in rent — of the :

skull were externally laced by a band and drawn tightly
together. (Vanheluiont.) Very painful ache over fore-


--- Page 17 ---
the forehead, Jahr.

Y wells creing, whieh then be-
painful, oppo y aa front, continuing the whole
(* Sweat on A Be

of the face and forehead.) bluish,

ear and the u maxillary bone. The cheek upon which
she is lying ig yng Claas Prickling pain of the

Eves: Pupils much dilated. Obs
eral attacks of blindness without the s
Distortion of the eyes. Distortion of the



--- Page 18 ---
sa ete ice! Sh 4
Me ate iat of he | imme-

+

Pye

th the calf ype gh

in Cle 7

; i ae a My wih set of
ally coop it

4

s} +s
= ;
e

i

re death,
@utt' busxi befate the ears, follow-
NPaiai th the aygon cas from at internal

Ei

ee ie ee a ting pain in several teeth, |
'h.) ‘Toothache in Ps pe svi saree fats
°

jaws, as if they would
Mourn anv roxove: ‘Tingling and burnin benign, the be Eee
and jaw bones; the teeth appear. ome 118 Bi
sie tongue, moet towards tia . Penetrating sharp
st in the end of the tongue, eontianed tx
yee ee
' i ‘sis .
dryness and ga the middie of the tongue, without
the alternate symptom of 81, go that both are primitive:
yh _~* . t

hich anaes 80 in a and fright as 1 -



--- Page 19 ---
10 * sCONTTUM NAPEULUS.

thirst. (a. 1h.) Senso as of prickling at the root of the t
Cie cutend by pookenr| with aie pends |e
ness of the mouth without thirst. Sense of dryness,
the Hips, shes in the mouth, with heat, vcieeoe fom the
i da Bicol be nis Ki pian genet
of di i ea a he mah dian erate
sin of nob gg the ith aan dmmhe ia a
in throat, wi
Tien Pie side of the neck to behind the enr.
Tanai i ‘on the left side of the throat, confined to
a stall y when swallowing or talking ; passes
na quart ee toes to the right side, ceasing on the left,
ring entirely after a quarter of an hour,—130, Prick-
ling in the throat. Aeute n the back of the throat, as
from the stnalliprickly hairs of | sweet} seed. (a. 1h.)
Burning and fine stinging ee the Teste’ the throat.
wm constriction in the wir heh sci
a i ike
of appetite ; pain in the chest and dae a pt Bi

ah, with gg in the ears.
, oie Sense of rnw-

‘Jeet ply paste a —145. Tendency to
ccuceation Page the cruetations remain suppressed. a
Hive the morning. Hiecough, in the morning, of
: pic Bp ale oy cit Somat and sine Pa

vara
sep ee cS “ing off soning
a ¥ 1
be Ie in succession. ite da Sipe ie

pea the’ the stomach peng ad
we a oe A ediaae intely, aint and nau-
eee

ee



--- Page 20 ---
ACONITUM NAPELLUS. i

a. $h.) Long continued qualmishness and loss of ap-

petite gt ler when walking in the open air. | 4
clination to yomit, first in the pit of the stomach, then under
the Pig Sa lastly in the throat, without flow of sein 186.

ing bad be as if something sweet or fat which is

hte let (a. th.) Nd ereaagy Dag er

when ‘artifictal excited, is fallow a by an vation of)

syinptoms.— 160, Vori poe ro Inclination a
ak profuse diarthaa. free AiPy when taken, it oe
presses her stomach. (Nod Seed ti ice I 2 ge Op-
pressive pain in the scrobiculus cordis, w is changed to
pene Sade 2 h,)—165. Oppression at the scrobiculus cor-
wii's Sas Bee ese een Sh set nie alge,

ne ape

feeling, as from too heavy lift-
ing ; foels Oppembn o ofthe a stomach.! nA ehing the

nthe spt cor, a nternall loss of
je and attacks of short breath.’ pressure, in
stomach, like a weight. (a. 1+ bh} 170. ‘Tension and
pain, as from fulness or a heavy weight, in the
hondria, (a. 13h.) Sense of contraction at the
Ree pane ee
chioddtria. A

inca Reese rca vail comaplosne of fection to ite colaeoee

AnpomEy :—175. Retraction of the navel, ly in the
morning before breakfast. Burning in the umbili region, Sense.
aa oF bieiae in ee which it
parse A sel cres then extends to the scrobiculus cordis, with

ous beating and lancinations in that part; after some time
she felt shrills of chilliness over the whole b y, with disappear-
ance of the sense of heat and of the sensation in
umbilical region. Mike fos at Ping ya the une

region. oes lowed directly

mal pressure nine ike jerks. G Gupins coh dee
th nal a ctething al cold cal arty whahees ee
*f out from within. sa eet

the’ he eat ad and is a tached y followed

Piet ae belly-ache in the region above the Raval. iw

z towards the navel from both

‘Nore: All of Rodder’s symptoms are derived from applying the
uice to & wound, oe


--- Page 21 ---
12 ACONTTUM NAPELLUS,

‘sides ; the pete: the he cau ‘i eal wen
st um, below the e ts ul
3 a distended ablomen.as from asei pis Violent
ings Se hi a region of oe liver, which intercept arrest
mn stool occurs a few hours sooner than usnal

batt it is him to strain a good deal. a a
and gruntin grunting 5 ri a with feeling of rawness. Rum-
bling and grunting in the rte the whole Rael ee Fer-
menting sort of grunting in the abdomen. He screams earl
in the morning, when in ed he knows not what to do wi
himself on account of an intolerable je (cutting). sl he tosses

about in his ies (a. 16 bh.) Colic-like belly-ache, causing
the parts to fee’ aabrescprc a ae ik sence be catised
behind the bs en Janghing maly, one ee as
behind nthe ti Dull a de in peri cataie besa
: ee es a ee oe oti
Seeneries,
coe, at a of the abomen i jee: o8
ln i in the the hg tao bcs art
tive which Potilence Very hot Matus, 5s

Involuntary ex expulsion of thi firces, takin
shat dg sare nore oldie ig lc dr a

ere Hard stool, accompanied by Esenieg.
—20), N sea with sweat, at ei oat
the Hpac Three. pore ps ‘stools a day,

‘necom hi oes stool. ieee stool and
cio - ater sae tase ium, when
; a rod res and sensitive. Wi ies 4 the Sowrpls
h as is generally consequent upon an urgatives
Pain in ‘the rectum, . Lh.) Stitches and prateane in the
cups condition of the lower rectum ;
Grote ; io hemorrhoids, Diarrhea,
accom Shr corks pire ey of urine, and moderate

see Sie: pbpprastiages ad ac ih tn

th)

tn cated ‘ea
sweat, Frequent, pgp Ds
urine, accom

traction of the feet. n

aes
t desire to urinate ; she
the bladder is rapidly filled with a quantity of limpid urin


--- Page 22 ---
te h, “arama urgent gh ah urinate. (a, 4h.)
Urgent desire to urinate ; an unusually small quantity Rnyof mine

— ming ren ee ne *

vhs onGaNs: Ite 0 ; off

0 a pier during Aeantne: Simple pain

ace those parts. sas Sh . om obage

a, n

able Megs in ayny sex He is | aacked with fits

of amorousness.— (Considerable Cris iktedivol
wit relation of the sexi oes) Denne

‘the sexunl desire. * Metrorrhagia, The menses which had

tow p ly font the cing, our aa

Se

“mesa 7 of anguish, with a
AAR: W
of pore Asthma. a. Fue lent si singh

in the abdomen.—245. One
a pai inthe region of the ribs of the lef ide Eten se



--- Page 23 ---
ld ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

she tried to suppress that the more freq

, While asleep, after midnig! BU. Artest of brea
through the nose, especially when asleep. * Stinking br
Noisy, loud breathing, the mouth being Asthma,
violent, oo ng

re 2 Dpto te
pressive anguish tn
e right reer the ext, afterwards
side of the sternum; a sort of asthma.

" m both sides. He felt a weight in th

chest; he feels as if the whole chest were being compressed

‘from ail sides, * Painful stitches in the right side of the chest,

of the last rib; these stitches extend

: the back, (a. 10 h.) Stitches an
—275

tient
from a bruise,


--- Page 24 ---
ACONTTUM NAPELLUS, 15

increased by external contact), Slow thrusts press out at the
chest in the oS of the heart. Clawing pain in the chest,
ing, rindi in in th ide ch tween
tlio dearth abe sixth Tite, ing ten minutes. Cla ache
a the chest, as of beetles of mills in-the
mamma. x in the loins, © i aed
Back; Aching in the small of the back, on the left

side, mening, corrosive pains near the vertebra, on the
Violently lancinating, grinding pain on the let side,

down the whole of the spinal marrow, the
of the: ; the pain became so vehement when sepiring,

=

zee
!
=
I
i

dorsal spine as faras the « over the left hip,
in on the left side of the small of the back. Grinding,
reaching from the left scapula towards the front
saat! inspiration, not increased by expira-
| y twelve minutes.

BcK; Pain amor: pled sce aegliees flesh were

i
E

eS
Fed
i
:


--- Page 25 ---
16 ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

dows along the arm, as far as the wrist, and even through the
fe jthe pain Gomes on mony when the ar
: the hands become bine while the pain lasts.
berg ) "Pain as from swianasg in ee reaped rap lls 5
slewp, exercise, as if the co a
too hand a0. Slogte stitches in the middle of the right
t arm in front, unchanged when at rest, or
10D, OF Sosa vd upon the seg Sen tna
natin posterior side of t t up
anbliny ig Sereda ved rmate ener immediately). Pain 4
the arm and fin A Bak Stunsing and paralysis of the seb
ag liad at he was scarcely able to move his:
His arms feel as if they were reo oy. blows, and a hey
sienna Chilliness and insensibility of the arms, Pain
‘the forearm pee ends blow. eae coe
motion.

© srs,
fingers she Regt ie ten ai, when seizi

Shoe) Aut to
iat in the Solow: i elng of paral
fore-arm rm and hand (when hen wig A
a n returned when sgh wiles
amp-like jade: wy le of the left fore-a
whieh contd not be m any. way. Dr i une
tearing pain in the external eidacot th the right forearm. ndu-
lating, tearing pain in the upper end of the left fore-arm.—336.
paige, ee pain ot the lower end of the internal sur-
face of the left fore-arm across the wrist, ests a a that the
hollow of the hand. Drawing pe herbi e right
wrist-joint. Contractive pain in the hollow Pr the te Ie cate
that he was sseaheg diy to stretch his fingers. Tearing
in the: d becomes as cold as ice, and inse ies
it feels numb, on h.}—340, Cold sweat of the palms of
the hands. Bes cee ln apf a ene. ot
han uent co © apporite normal,
lo Sie will when moving the baad eae

‘ of the they hand, as witha’ mated pn 8 ile

‘ache eee roe, oy e right index, extending towards

the middle | ee exercise and when at rest,
a had r left th t ae the



--- Page 26 ---
of the arm. i
areata Sn hee df pete

L Baewenrries Teasive p

4 ceed
Pains es oe the ewe ae
eh ing rate andl meditations about

wer parts of the legs and the feet feel numb, and as.
they had gone to sleep, Deep, slow stitch across the
knee. "Painful 7 in the foot, reachin Lo tie kite ae
far as the heel and upwards, T on the
internal side of the knees. —370. Paraiyeie anaes fo
leg and the tendo Achillis, reaching as far as the heel.
ness of the feet as far ax the malleoli, with abn tg te and
cu Liye ne Sensation in the malleoli, as ee Ani

hia band. Excessive pain about the

epee ’ oe aarn! si tga (a. 7 ) Coldness
the feet, y
Leno MPTOMS 375, 73, Sweling ot the part vee

the juice had
Sasa eed doer cia a li sectaally
pec through the whole bed pes
Hien retings bere there ver the bey. Sin Sin-
es here and there, long continued, mixed



--- Page 27 ---
18 ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

Here pone, “Tingling, wei
‘ s. n tehin ya ee ad
especi Poth oF toe etetn : — 380, ge he hands
in the face, looking like flea-bites, Reddish es filled with
an aerid fluid. Lae, red itchin get. wage ew bony.
The whole body is painful to the touch ; Saeco ee ake

r itself to betel it greeter as if she
; setae a hea sease, and vig
Mek bod (a. 6, Feelin esa, oh mle in the aims
and sis ua ey hal been bruised by blows, accorm-
panied ¥ violent trembling of the whole body, ly the
extremities ; this almost sch aag him from: walking; exces-

sively pale face, dilated pupils, fain ting, * palpitation of the
heart, cold sweat on the back, and pain in nj deep as if the |
parts would burst asunder—soon cn ofthe he face
with a feeling of tension and rednes othe fa
salen uae exer his eae reaction?) T ralytic condition of
to the gh ea herving the left. ‘The
“eras mg er Hsaear thee cae Re the. ier
rac head, jaws, chest; att n at pte er
t + Gaaieanse of the A eenine aa sudd
i med teeth, hi for. ee
a stiff immo i nap pcb bors y).— 390, Little
sells ag ninth a5 the he w hk iy
swells u e eyes he ge Ting hangs out of the
the All the oy aiplae: h.) Great wenkness

Sete lens peat ares ot peo ints: = those of the eet,
with twitchings of th tendons, ce he can Enid sdlehsoy wa Ik.
Painfulness of the whole body, with in
Weakness yoy Aaa 4 Sirmness of the ligaments of all the
joints. (a. 46 Painless cracking in all the joints,
especially of the Pace
Weakness, Parwrine Frrs: Lassitude of the extremities,
Psi Saxe of the feet, bb constant sleepiness and peevishness,
Karly on wakir ‘na ghee lassitude was so great that he would
his ralittle while it disappeared. He com-
lains of weariness of the whole body; great weakness and

ny
ions, being quicker than the receding, and fale
* of aps dain, Swoon. The rr
air, and allt abate
to her, she {Sapa iy

vi e prefers gent
She is obli to lie do
bt tse le desire to lie do a ted (eteen ad



--- Page 28 ---
an his yar ‘o WA Seg) s..*
a vivid dream, which gives ‘him Hight on a subject that wa

: riddle to him while awake, (a. 20h.) Half

' on atid even when awake,

: ent exclusively pou that same ob-

ject for several hours (like # monomania); this is very trouble-

some and tormenting to him, *Anxious. divans at night, aud

waking up several as from fright—435.  *Uueasy night.
‘Slumber, Easy four or five hours. —

Fever: Desire for cold water, Feverish, wade de
mittent pulse, Sensation as if all the veins became er"
Sensation as if the circulation were arrested in all the veins.
Lexier but he is freezing and shiver dont eistion se

op Ear feather- Dizziness of the head, early on

rath Shier ne oenng, feels as if he th a ly badly
iti See os



--- Page 29 ---
-

20 ACONITUM NAPELLUS.
Pe hest She feels ts chilly and is Pia by the chill, Cold

over back and chiljiness.
Pte, ehinnes alias aid lees of the tips of the
fingers, afterwards in the themselves ; then, sensation
a's camp ie slo th tee thee

the forehead. (a. + h.j—455. Coldness over the whole body.
Piaiions the whole body, with sige on the forehead, hot
lobules ears, and internally dry heat. Fever, coldness,

with of the bic sachar apes beens ches
sat cciness and other, with open, staring

contracted pupils, which diate Rew it ges and slowly hi om
in the dark. Chi liness and coldness the hd and ‘feet to-

aftr eating, but then comes on “the std eri ge

is accompanied b ring thoughts, Frequent attacks:
of extreme srt oxi oral theeeibe myc iy of a of an
hour, every other hour; he is unable to move either his
hd be cut et in et
to feel his former to see, or talk aloud ; the:

are extended at the Diba ee ©. after ater hours. 4
Alternate fits. (a. 3, 4,6.) “Bither redness of the cheaks,

over the whole body,—and a correct taste in the mouth ;
“redness of the cheeks, shiverings accompanied by weeping ted
oppressive headache ; or redness of the cheeks, obstinacy, refrac-
tory pe ae burning in the umbilical region, my Set oppressive
headache. Excessive redness of the cheeks, with peevishness,
and a whining and plaintive mood. (a. 3h. . Towards
pices Ss aria Prec heat in the head and face, with redness of the
posiege “sapeaes! oxpare ressing from within outward; at the
chills over wae bees and thirst. (a. 14 h,)
Towards ¢ ame partie with =| The
front of the hs ton the Sretiontl tating bee uh cone
over the rest of the body, coming on at the slightest motion.
Feeling of heat in the hands, then in the whole body, even i

i even in
the chest, eat ore his ternal heat. Ve
at severe of over chi back. (Heat the bane
for beer during the heat. (She nicinke litte sgt attend
the cough,

has nevertheless dry lips.) (She is incommpded


--- Page 30 ---
_ ACONITUM NAPELLUS. at

siete ba ons een

rds =) Violent ahold wt
. ida
orchent icone wcll sey

” * Nightly. “ia ‘te
: a4 cee in
sorts ae
hs hte. Short eae

dlepote oda Totsea kvspitiia ork
hy 6 Oi boone eg i ke to sig and dae ~
* ne omes 1 vagy ne & n

(The
yom ar Phys cm
toms. car senses, At ti <a

he is full of hope. After

his hop ‘s 2X Mm . Trembling and in-
nitation fh hea —ii). Palpitation of the
and ay ith increased temperature of the body,

especially o the face. Palpitation of the heart, reat
$ fis irat i My fools + ihe ikea
pi asi the head mes bs decstad 3 she fools iy atid
owing to flushes of re Anguish and
by is stiches in the bare of the chest: tsereeita ths ttre
epee =
Or ' ‘and piteous howling, ' mentations au
erie which



--- Page 31 ---
2g AMARA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA.

which J haye just sang,’ , grief—10. The least noise
in intolerable i him, wis) " ghe Bods music intolerable ;
it gives her a disagrees feline in all her limbs ; she becomes
te melancholy, (a. 24 h.) "“axtreme fi rightfulness. (s
th. tukes every jest in bad part. (a, It. is ex
tremely inclined to “feel vexed. (a.4 hn) 8i8. he

unrrelsome, (a. 6 h, She makes reproaches. hoa he

1arrelsomeness and childish mania west ames weer id
tells childish tales, and is excessively merry.
stinacy.—620. Misanthropy. Sedate, ete oe
mood (reaction and curative effect). (a. 8 h.) ive

ti “At times he a weep; at finish e wa
pe folly. aE pehtsion app prow is ith.
eas o of death, returning from time to *Plai.

apprehension of approaching death. ‘Fear ie some misfor-
tine should happen to him,

AMBRA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA.

Tris drug is sold ata very high price; it is, the
he found noes only in the sa ry ia aye
is found in the intestines of the pot tak
strated already re un ; or is, pr
substance Pinan ly in il-bladder of that

ipo Armbrs

sr ind been demon-
ably, a tallow-like
D Madagascar

of an especial puri e sea, on the qggsts of
and Sumatra sat ep Fete k es bstance is com-
of smal rough, opaque masses; Which are spohay,
iter than water, and may be ensily broken into rough, aaered

jooes 5 ly they have a brown grayish color ; internally
they are pervaded with yellowish, reddish, and blackish veins ;

they are moreover interspersed with whitish, odorous dots,

heh pleas are a little i, the tea and emit a faint, but

ring fragrance, —

“ven Liege pcan warm fingers, that su becomes as

pr pred abr gin to the heat of boiling water, it flows

ike oil, ing atthe sane time a strong, delicious | nee,

and, when laid upona piece of red-hot tin, burning up si

* She bad | it
had been ta ee taken ei tie day enoying

per five haus efor
there sang the passage from Benthoven, #
her betrothed ahead eopseialty ee ee

4

<4


--- Page 32 ---
« vo

Atnbra ignites éasily. Cie very little of it dissolves

of wine ; regain ony ay i entirely; from this solu-

tion ete Rabie bbod be precipitated

ol Sat smell of araticn is increased

solution, and also by triturating it with nee nces.
one grain of this = seguie Ambra, and Piatt

which have been taught in the first volume of

chronic diseases. A small of the ah oF
“is An ieie : ope tke mt

nae
os lectic His Payee bth of the me

tellectual organs.—Weakness of co epdereay “ied and ae
ry-—Nervous vert igo, especially in Prep se—
ache.—Amblyopia amaurotica.—Nervous hard giYontepagal
Epistax g in the liver?—Complaints from flat-
tence. —Exeitement of the sexual instinet—Excessive fre-
i of nightly Try chanditoomarh: taseae effects of a
convulsive cough, sealoeid ahha bling
hooping-congh.— Asthmatic com especially in scrofa-
lous children.—Morbid conditions of old people, cad of indi-
viduals with a dry, thin, bilious constitution —Rheumatic and
arthritic complaints ?
Axyatocous Remepres: Nux. v. Puls, Staph. “Vial. odor
Cham. Gmp. Lye. Phosp. Sabad. Sep. Siig Verh.
—%, Canth. Mezer, Ipec. Rut. Scien BU
Played Violent vertigo, Gacmeas a rous ver-
Vertigo, when walking in the open air, in che fore and
. She had to lie down on account of vertigo,
By oo in the stornach, (in the forenoon, after 72
al oer er were in a d peat Fada not
to reflect u an y; he stupid
(he ti 24 bh.) dee Mei F Pee iignte are weak;
tial Mgrs thing ~ or four times, and, after all, he
dst wi the meaning of whut he reads. Great weakness
head, with vertigo go ee depen the head,
a . sort of chilliness Headache every
aaiaee head feels empty and ati, as if she igned
been revelling the whole t. Obtusion of the occiput.

2:


--- Page 33 ---
=» ~

24 AMBRA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA.

‘Tenititin in the head, which makes one feel stupid, Cla
headache, starting from both temples, Cla obtusion |
the head.—15. Oppressive ebitision of the immediatel
after ine Bie (ail during motion. Pressure in the
with a besoin € razy.) (a.48h.) Oppressive
eadach: se the f aiiahead. Aching in the oeciput and nape of
the neck. Downward-pressing pain in the forehead and the top of
the head, every other day, accompanied by heat in the
and in the eyes, pa eness of the 1 face, beginnit ponte Ai
the morning—inereasing only in the
of blood to the head fortwodays. (Painless) fealinirof presetre
on the nf of the head, and heaviness of the fre Piet ot
ing. (a, 36h.) Pressure and stitches in the head.
in a small place of the eeciput, Aching in the spe yrs
eminence.—25, Pressive traction ascending from the ae
of the neck, and extending through the head towards
forehead, pagent gn remaining behind in the lower
part of the occiput, re in the whole occiput,
extnalingssiar anthe (op pen the Ae forehead ‘Shootings through
the head. ‘Traction or tearing in the head, to and fro. 15 g
on the left side of the ag tow ante win yack eh me
and behind the ear.—30, Tearing in the left
ey the vertox, also, in the right cual solneore aa hin
loft car. "Tearing headache in the forehead as este ths
= per partof the face. Extremely painful tearing on the top
the ey and apparently, in whole ber half of the
with paleness of the face and coldness of the left hand.
witehings in the head.) Stitch in the head over the left
ep 3 a 3 h,)—35. In the evening, several very severe
towards the occiput. When making an ex-
Ep oes a laneinating and cutting headache; he
every se ny feols easier when lying down. Ex.
in the nape of the neek and in the neck,
pain psa from. ee the parts in lifting, painful to the touch
the whole day, (#, 12 d.) Headache as if a cold would
come on, at times increasing, at tines decreasing, and continual,
—40), On the right side of the head there isa place where the
hairs cannot be touched without sufforing pain, Painful spot in.
the oceiput. Humming around the temples, “Falling off of the
hair. (a. 24b.) O ve and ng headache, especially
re and on cpre the sy hevieeee on the left eyebrow,
ressure upon the eyes, as were deep in the or
with tearing headache extending downwards from pee
ley or from the ear through hea cocoa) ) (a. 3h.) Short, vio-
lent pressure close over the nose, in the forehead, in frequent



--- Page 34 ---
Terria detesion of the head. P.
head, Red pimple on the middle of the

yes :—B0, Pressure and biting in the

whieh had in. ‘Tearing and lachrymation Ww
ty the je wan pee wh
eyes, as of t too
- = meine nl ven he theo he
© or short teye—
er 8 Burning pei in the rays eye. (a. 10h.) Reming ar th —
of the as ifa Bedi would form
itilation ees Tut

ples in the face, ha g no sensation, Grav! a lin
spec aoe k oie
ch a > withont any psantubid Pimples og itchiog in in -
e en the cheek, as from swelling.
eons Gua ciaiek: (ob tha tinnpets ate, with dhvobbhags in
8, (a. a few hours.

ARS : a inthe ight ea ety in he the mornin yes

quently at other placos.—75. * Roaring

afternoon. (after 4 ass
ie lc machin, ad os mt bos a sack

watch.) Deafness of one ear. Hearing decreases vd,

five days in succession, (a. 6 d.) Vi ea in in

De oe ccna ot right w Gielen; towards
ram e

chal seatur. Bort (Great dryness fee » inside of the nose,

ensily, Driod blood ers in
Se es Seated me ol oe

Jaws ann : $5. Spasm of the ave lip, and sen-
ssion 98 it wor being pressed against the gums and tom
thos} sig eh gin the Jaws Gees nine Soka
ing in t ws, ws, as

being screwed ~ together or asunder. Drawing pain
¥ ey at times in — ans ac pain Ss

warnth, was suppressed by ¢ ora few moments,
net beoome worse by shawites sad went off after a meal; the.


--- Page 35 ---
MBRA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA.

a say side, were swollen.—90. Considerably
rates mae rer Pain i the hollow ket in ~~
evenin ain in oliow tooth, especially in the open

an ihaine were being touched. After diner paint ina
hollow , more Sy tanotcintib than tearing, for half an hour.
(a. Bh) i corer - MA ow aes
5. ee ac nily e wer molar
teeth ; in the cies Ng noe in bed. Dra. pain, some-
times in the teeth of the right, args or in those of the left
side. ‘Traction in the incisor tooth, as if a current of air rushed

ae

into the tooth, causing a stitch there, of the teeth.
Unusually copious by from the lower of the right
side-—100, Pain of a su gland, which
swollen. (a, 3d.

Morn: Pai odor from the mouth. “Tongues mouth and
lips: er quite numb and dry, early on waking up. Great dry-
of the mouth, early on waking oP, rowing a total
wath of thirst, for i days, - Smarting, and sensation of
excoriation in the interior ae ssoheny } pain Semen her ey an
eating any thing acrid.—105, Bi sters in the mouth, which pain
one as if the place were bu ae tongne is ie unty-
yellow. Tuberculous growths under the ton feel
sore. Feeling of contraction in the salivary g a oaiidg a
meal, especia Aiba de swallowing the first mouthfuls.
Turoat: Rheumatic pain in the back partof the t
and fauces, between the acts of swallowing.—110. 'T’ ng
pain of the palate, as far as into the left ear, Sensation of
rawness in t jon of the velum pendutum palati. Rawness
of fi throat, Rawness of the throat, as ina cold, for some
115. Sensation in the throat, as if she had something
ed init. Tearing in the interior of the throat, and in the
a of the fauces, Sense as of biting in the back part of
oe fauces, between the acts of seaty i Pressive, biting
pain in the back part of the Youn tira 40 tithe. Sore
throat, as if something im mais (a, 8 d.).—120,
(Sore throat, not when swallowi pes js ee an empty

degtutition and when there is it, Aecompa-
nied by tension of the ovical eate glands, as ae i iar: they were ake
len.) (a. 4 d) (Sore throat, produced by a draft rede
there are stitches Sr hepa the tieck into the the right ear ; the

parts are especially painful when moving the tongue.) Shore-
tion of mucus in the throat, with roughness and rawness.
Hawking up of mucus early in the morning. Choking and
gre can hardly be avoided when hawking up phlegm from

ances,

_


--- Page 36 ---
WW r~

e.

ah atierth 35. se
ee soegh ~~ a icles ue

Strensan the head immediately a
eee pe Rede neces, aioe
aye feeling ‘ea aia ej ueeah
re a Me és basi Stitehes' Pad 3
Spasm of a ressure
in the region of the ‘

remedy
Anpomes : 150, Pressure below the scrobiculus Ly
and in the h ium, from time to time, also at ni
Pressure in the epigastrinm, hands ae feet being cold. _
sure in adeargpreniehag assumes the form of,'a clawing
Pressure in the umbilical Las. ig 5p with heartburn ; this
cel agri ei 155. Viol pence bell
t hip.— jent spasms bas
Contin Poe Scania ta the the epigastrium, diminishing by walking
ing era when sitting down. Pressure in the
5 say eve urs, remaining unaltered either when:
a. 6d.) Aching in a small place in the
right sie of the abdomen, ithe region of the livor ; the
aan is Tee felt when touching ris. Achi Bay the
liver. A iene inflation of ¢
teetver meal, even every time he swallows . drink,
tee ao abdomen. (after a few h.) Diswnded abdomen.
(a. 6h ight in the abdomen, carly in the


--- Page 37 ---
al = ™
a

-_
ii

98 _ AMBRA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA.

“The abdomen feels compressed.—165. Weight in
Pigg Md yaamonerts SoS ee pe Wan beet ee

and were suffering a pressure, co from the spinal tar
TOW. etuay ‘Cave ina by the emission of
on Pastas Clawin aoe oS t iline region.
First, ela wang pein io the be y, th cutting in the
cpt, ch goes off by an craton * Trouble caused
by incarcerated flatulence, occasioning a pain, especially in the
Wh ide of the abtomen 178. After” matdnight t he pales z
wet a considerably distended abdomen, especially a awn
agg owing to incarcerated flatulence exci
iat Mane fi ressitl eae the a
on of flatulence prone ven
ae any emission of Hits apt Ho
Fermentation, and audible os ae
cay, however, is not felt. Sense.as ae gin the hye
gastrium, with yiolent fermentation a Mae ks

gastri when lying in the bed early in the mo :
dtrsiuished i a oF at by lyi ng pli Prev atm
when lying upon the back. lent colic, in the evening.
Colic, when in bed, after midnight,’ even shite a a
sweal.—175. Colic, ‘with a soft ae early in the |
two mornings in succession. ben, 5 d. BS at colic, wi

diarrhea occurring three times; in succession, (a
neh enite in the pr ish oe seer of coldness on the
abdomen. of one for two days.

(a. 48 h. ar * Twitchings in the abdosninal muscles, in
evening. Stitches over the hips, for two in (a. 5d.)
pressure, or dull stitch over the eine Pee When draw-
ing e rotaaganlen § one ex lent prickin diag tha wert in the
hypogastrium, whi be cased by pes
from without. Stischiog pain around the sig ea when ‘noting
the abdomen, especially when drawin piece
Stoo. : Freqnent tenesmus, no this mae er, a Lees
deal of anxiety ; daring this time the borhood of
le is intolerable to her. ‘Tenesmus is followed by mica
ing pain in the By tosses, especially of lesa side, (a,
some days.) ‘enesmus of the rectum. stools. (a, 24
h.) * Constipation, (a. 4 d.)—190., Rivard the rote
Itching of the anus. Jiching vee the one - some hy
Itching of the rectum. Itehin e rectum,
which go off by mbbing.—195. of the joined Four
ordinary Pm ge owt the space of a few hours. (a. a
few hye may away hit-brown stools. {a. $d.) tates

appears to ool which had been ying heretofore,


--- Page 38 ---
ishing ie
hic co het qr in 5 ulerine

the genital without considerable erection or
ta ati ger hip arse \ ovwihs

of the that feeling continues for
da gla a) 238. Violent er erection, early, on waking us

bein
eS ae Bs, cate tos ian tee ie figs beading


--- Page 39 ---
30 AMBRA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA.

in the rt of the urethra. The erecti

action) menses occur three days ieee

d.) The menses spans Te de del before the time. (a

Sigh they bed mane tay would bart ny
on twenty-one s 8 a

ag the bili a. 2 hy) Dang th the

oe the left leg becomes blue from ‘dist

xperivnces a Ut pain, (Profuse ‘capa ak a
(Dacha of bl ae wee righ of mucus frem pe

of thiek mucus, inereasing front
d ae aischarge bo asc kaye sco pong

ee CATARRH & haar Asien the forehead and eyes,
" merce about rod seg ieaduche when blow-
A Obstruction of Ap nose, which feels sore inter-
i ES IC Frogger gi

bya n as
if one would sneeze. Occasional 5 Pigg

ts in the throat, Soames ue 0 voice, alter

stig wh hick ig eat ania
when clearin: tn iat oy t cough. (a. 10, 24

palit bree top tin a li i
a; accompan the e tora white my
Tiekling in the ma which ne expec F net
Hest :—260), Cough at night, nn exces-
sive irritation in the ‘Serato Fa speed by eh Cough
excited by rawness of the throat. Accum of grayish
phlegm in the throat, which it is difficult to hawk up; accom-
panied by rawness of the throat. Tickling in the throat and
the thyroid body, d the act of coughing. Burning and
Kenne oe iillaion, <“ asia sy tom the larynx down to the abdo-

foes pak aaa pet iin i gre
gan wit ft
ribs, 1s: loose there. hes M

owi wr ‘ive f ieaecion in the throat, ional
picker, bs paroxysms of cough. * Violent scarvaletve ne

accom pervc ony aneie eructations and hoarseness.—270, A
kind of of whooping-cough. (a. 48h.) Deep, dry cough, with
accumulation of water in the mouth, and subsequent rawness
in the throat, Sensation durir ie ees coughi ughing, as of
sore place in the throat. Saltish expectoration, when cough-


--- Page 40 ---
AMBRA GRISEA,

there. eee
rawness in

the an a tora more ee ee the sl
Hel ertor ey ie sh of the chest, below the ac.
‘Tearing pressure in the left side of the chest,

Back: Violent pressure in the lower part of the small of
the back.—300. tie sinall of the back, when sitting.
athe , sharp stitches in the small of the

, increased test motion. Painful tension in the
enema pain in the back, on the right
side. Pan th back ifthe Jacko he we being com-

to right himeel£—306, fuming in the the foft scapula. Stitches
the left. jess 2 (the first days). — Rheumatic eats the
Tighe Wes Drawing ache in the nape of the neck. 'Tear-

ing in both shoulders.

behiers Extremities 310, Tearing in the left
shoulder-joint. Inthe evening there istraction in the shoulder ;
pips) sprained and pares Violent, dull stiteh in the top

the right axilla, (a. 2 h.) ‘The arms easily go to sleep, *when

ee


--- Page 41 ---
32 AMBRA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA.

lying upon them. At night, the right arm vently ra

h a rae goes to sleep. —315. ‘The SF goes 10

pad daring the day, when at rest. | gin the right ied
early, for five minutes Sense as of gurgling in the arm.

vin the arm. (Paralysis of the right upper arm.
rage in the right elbow. ‘Tearing about the the right chew
‘Tearing in the right elbow and ache in the

right fore-arm, as far as the elbow. Mis habla te to sleep
night.—325, “Cramp in the hands, Pee) tate aes
the fin: cea ariacewn crooked. | lysis of the
pty for a ew minutes. (a.6d.) _ Waakioarcr the fingers,
at night, s0 | that he had to make an effort in order to sc |
Bes P ga ede han Se re ene a iy
hands for a long time, . Painful coldness
ora long time, ney coldness of the hands, in the
the hands feel chill te bpd in hr the

portion of th Seingines fe
wots. = sf conepagr ee spo ae row

evening, in repeated short Ort PATOXY SIS, | Tearing in the posterior
joint of the past —340. (The he posterior jis of the
fingers become stiff in the evening, and the yi being leat
thamb becomes. swollen, antl wed ue pail on

this symptom is worse when she her fingers
during ic is day.) ‘Tearing in the ch indexing Tearing
in the last two fingers, in in the ev before egg

the right hand. The skin of the

a |
left thumb ; when toughed eg slightly, ‘gt Nae as if a

spli decreases
when the pene: upon. n. Tingling in the tip of the Argonne
as if ‘hed ¢ gone to sleep; this symptom passes off for some
time oy aes. parts,

INFERIOR ener Kein 'g the left, and after-
wards in the right in front, close below.
the left hi ing tearing
the left half of the nates. . ‘Tearing in the right half’ of



--- Page 42 ---
-

es qtpies ast

seeeisetsiafaes

j

2

SH

3

+

Poses
ae.

}

sion in the left foot

a. 26 d.

(

lett foot,



--- Page 43 ---
34 AMBRA GRISEA, OR AMBROSIACA,

weat, the whole day. (a. 24 h.}—405, Itching, almost all
ekg theabdomen. ‘The itch is is reproduced upon the
esti wats = Book dee) ok Neha, oo 8 are reduced,
Burning in several places of the
waking he eae a fe sent ont le as far as th
knees, without being cold ; the hands have i an in
sensation; the skin seems to have gone to minporges theres
no no tingling —A10. We can perceive the pulse ee it

the tick of a watch, * Twi etn

‘Gaon twitching in all the limbs,

‘at night, a, 5d. en walkin ig a i i re
an an at in the hye the ad = ie ne n
accom of the |

easiness in ait ah i ttnbe, vike a ti a tingling, accompanied: bya
‘sort of anguish, only <3 day.

Weaxyuss ann Farsruvo Rat Ts Sr rail te) he a
morning (in aroom which was extremel de
felt so weak that he was not able hands:
forehead being covered with a ade emi earls =
‘ishness. (0.8,24h.) * Fainti Tu
when in bed, Great pastas in in or ed ithe mi

insensible, (a. 48 bh.) had to lie Seniee } aceon of

orig | and a feeling of weakness in the ou Mls (a, 72 8
xe: Disposition to stretch and to extend one’s se

+(Sictpineee by day.) Sleeplessness before midnight. He

cannot sleep at night, he knows not why, Sleeplessness

for several nights; slumber early in the morning, which is

full of fanciful ravings. —430, Frequent waking up during the

bn cot to waking up ; at two o'clock in the night, one

ss in the whole body, especially

Swing Falling a late; afterwards * uneasy sleep

i Plone in ng epigastrum, especially on the

pene Bes ) nausen, for several nights

after ht, and

dry, there is a good deal of pressure in the epigastrium, which


--- Page 44 ---
AMBRA GRISEL, Ay een 35
i ae gi igdhe Symes. al ie

ty ots

2a s
iy. At cece lies upon his back,

with eg apres Ur lieth Wis ;
’ these vid dreams. Starti

hee se tai the eee ey eap +> he

baer thas thats & top ants Ha

bed with a sort of anguish. tease

uneasy ms come on

sleep is uneasy ; it talks

* Uneasy sleep with anxious dreams. (a. 5 d. ye

laa etl has anxious d if he

as ey ath anxious reams as were
abased and too weak to defend himself; on waking up he
ocd ft ikness in the upper part of the body, accom-

panied by a clawing pressure under the pit of the iNeeah

nausea when lying down and

rpkyphlegy eer
abdomen; the sym wever,

when one is wide awake, s an moves about ; they ter-

minate with Oh — lence, fermentation in the

tig we erictation. ba gig

and

while asleep, for eight fave, Qipeocianly. Dreams

stir, Uneasy sleep a to co ea te
wig i he in

nays and t ‘aoe chilliness at
night, v him f asleep, or which rouses
him frotn » night; he ce ference Chilliness
and weariness, whi three F inelination to go to sicep,

four forenoous in succession ; this symptom went off by taking


--- Page 45 ---
J
36 AMBRA GRISEA, OR AMMROSTAGA.

some dinner. (a. 72h.) Chilliness, sleopiness, wearin
and dull headache an since the ae pg ; the a
il Chablivves weari-
aig. ADs IS

y one cages
hess pet ache, after two diarrhma-like evacuations,
Slight chills before dinner (the mi (Cold skin over the
whole body, except: neck, and genital ©  4en Tnnt

u, from seven tovight o'clock. (a. 12¢

two evenings in su



--- Page 46 ---
of five ounndaatin
nd a half and



--- Page 47 ---
38 ANGUSTURA.

Violent

The ta srt from time to time violent com
sions, exeenies pee oo electric sho
it Wes sonewhas

termination of the | which eer

beer x Ropes reat with great pao ty, shorting, cheeks
_ Great irenast eames, :

team was brought on by merely sli tepid

verre idles at 102,
‘Tetanus either obit pry was brought on by a
noise, or by touching some part of the body ; the boy screamed
irre cats Sagrod ad atmos touch him.
etccaedate tetanic fit, the eyes were closed ; forehead and
on ng, Without any ¥ distinctly indicated pain.
beeen ney emicieter oe sami ere lag
ing was convulsive and interru uses,
Piisth Gubved after an hour. i
Half-an hour afler death, the body ‘Was stiff and rigid.
Bera ack ere hours afier death, the smell of corruption set

the veins contained liquid blood
at the color vf brown wai 8 a

The right lung was pale externally, and bloated ; it ne
full of blood rae a oe ay was blue externally ; it
looked blackish when cut, and led with blood,

‘(Angustura vera, if given | Sa ie ‘nena dose, would probably

roduce similar symptoms.)

Other observers cone the fact, ee ace ae of Angus-
tura- hapa prices vertigo, anguish, inimo.
iieeban, task Sei i fur pron, ght

me that four persons, ea Ww
had salen ben cries: grains of the extract in the shape of
pills, were attacked with ae,
Rigidity of all the muscles of y, as in tetanus; one
of them y fell to the ground, with consciousness.
Lockjaw. ;


--- Page 48 ---
ANGUSTURA. 99

rb, . pes

nthe pera walki mpl. “Sindenty obtusion of
head, as of a skin draw rata, baifan hour, (ed hy)

FP phen "Ghee occu th
sou We wes is constantly ed wih th ons

fe. 45h) Sometimes he is lost in revery, and even comple

absence of im it; he easily

the first three afternoons, the

Ronctp ota reading. For
pes De a arc project wh he almost believes to

be \
ao Pompeo sty waking dream. fe: $) In the
n, great animmtion aiid facility of intellect ; he
ls every. in much more easily than on the first day, and
y than formerly : but he feels unable to dwell upon
he sujet ong to some internal uneasiness, such as is
pate by those who anticipate some great pleasure, or



--- Page 49 ---
40 ANGUSTURA.

also owing tall sorts of plans crowding 0 his mind,
(a. 35h.) Early, after sista Brest honviness ail he forehead,
Without any confusion in the bead. scoplae {10 pains d.)—15, Pressure in

the left hemisphere when abates when
mising the head again, { eonoalaaly acpue in the tem-
ples. (a. 1h.) ‘Headache in the ead, towards. evening,

with great heat in the face. Headache only oceurred when
there was heat in the face. cusasbeniwers occurs towards
evening, and continues until the enneiona os talks asleep.—20.
Headache, as if every thing inthe brain were moving about, with

oppressive and boring pain, lly in the temples ; when Iny-
ing the forehead po tira k agin Soin towel loan

. > &
oppressive pain in the temporal region, In the evening, drawin
Ser Onetatve becache on tees side of the with
pressure on the lower sel (a. 1h.) Tearing he,
ging | extending Se Gee ce
(a. 24 h.)—25 fapemitieere ricking ‘in the temporal
region, more  peweyee a. 4h.) Hat ie ing. stisahen
ola cetraonehres temp peste which do net ob vite
Tortchings at & sal pac, wer the a
vie upon the place, it pains as
E gee aes a
YER: twite u the eve
A few stitches ee es Violent burning in the pa
half of the eyes ves, and in the internal corner of the
same. ‘Tension, first in one, then in the other eye ; it seems
to be directed from behind forwards, early in the eR.
(a 48h.) There seems to be a feeble vapor before the eyes,
which soon passes off. Soreness of the eyelids. Feeling of
dryness under the upper eyelids —35, Pressure it both eyes as
if @ bright light were irritating them, and kishore tary
weary. 1 et rand ak Rag
seem to Tike mata ‘ontraction of the tt, )
pico ae (a. ta "Preston th ia pa
the orbit, wibtionig a. 14h.) 40. lesig Siete
inthe upper eli whieh cannot bé removed by rmbbing.
) , On Seager nape at ed Gd ec
Slien Weel ebaeuied: (a 24h.) He sees much farther and
sien ee than usual,’ “sightednens; he saw dis
at a distance, whereas he generally was short.
rebied, ( -2phy

' Note: Reaction of the organinm, * Reaction of the organism,

Be


--- Page 50 ---
iS
5
:

i

:
Ee
ig
aee
HF

;

rat
“

SPE
BiG
apeeegett
Ge
ae
ashes?!

A
rf
-
cE

i
ie
a
g
z
:
i

: Great dryness
without any thirst. (a. 3h.) Slight traction in some of the opper
pivivarper st re: sie pened pointed out with:
wing pain in the two ail rp AI right
an See cen, i sth
td yt alata by te wage the Bh with th th rool A
ma touc As Wd hel 0
sien fr : Ninh dowe, ame Sie
ms of the upper row, (a. proms.
feecmeah esol Sheet inkess soartohes) ie
has no desire for drink ; ges he craves warm
inore than cold ones ; he did vany chilliness after the cold
drinks.—75. ies opine walk, as if he would faint,
by great lassitude allover, which did not abate
i A Sorbet afterwards he felt ax if the nausea rose into,
he felt hungry. vik abt mp red eructations
pe harass Bilious eructations, Pi pehing stitoles ix the tinar


--- Page 51 ---
42 ANGUSTURA,

the t , which are extremel leven when the
ck ove: (a. 6 bh.) —S0. Lai pepper on the lof
pee ps Seeutad ‘ : fh engi nd
ue witha ness. (a. ness a

derceet in the ick pr of the palate 3 es bapa ed
thirst, worse w. aor ape ptstoyeh z (a 25h) The voice is

tot take ta Wes Tain ended By apg Yoo wt be te
tor taste to whic

otherwise etme. (9h) Putrid, flat taste in the mouth,
eed a Bea time, | and

(a, 30 he Great’ desire for cold drink. ain .
ie hi eet 3h.) Nausee; pent,
evenin, Fe ng amt i sth ac tnomne

id, insi Pp ogm, he cou drink e

his” appeite sve great, yet he dows ste
nourishment ; he fi it were offensive to him; at the
same time he experiences a fulness in the chest own to sup-
préssed eructations ; he feels unable: ‘to satisfy his noes Dy
po Sapte Ss son tt tor tel coating petit

i cn: Int i the cutting: in
sine spt ean iF eres salt din the meal. (a. 3d.)
ramp- me lbaay- tet siece it of the stomach, in the
pe fp hong by mori (a. 13 ae gr rgek tearing in the
pit, increased by poche es after dinner,

Anpomnn: rumbling in the abdomen. Stitches.in
the alxlomen, falloned by a sense as of drawing. Early in
the morning, diarrhasa comes on after previous colic, and
nausea; the last evacuation was mere olin, Colic and
diarrhara ; the Inst evacuation was mere ee (a. eh) h.)
—100, (Ti ingling itehing of the rectum, as of ascarides.) Cut-
ting ws + the short ribs, in the right side of the abdomen, when

ving the tu ee i 48 h.) Deu shaking, erratic shootings
in iD the he abdomen, Dull stitches in the ore
on the et sie ear the navel, (a. 24h.) Cutting pain in the
left lumbar region from within ee (a. 3 b.j—105. "Out.
ting in rinks coc transversely over the osea

osea pubis,
accony see to the rectum. ath) ©
like cle when Walkin Pithtag betloe highs lanes 2 region

pain as a bruise, i in a
side “fy the ak enw th in vag air, (a. 1
Pressure in the by utward,. ite.

by a nu Ager aera: ‘over
= mele when sitting, as “ia amp g out tine


--- Page 52 ---
Aries?
tet es

existing indications of. diasrhre.--190. Sensation
pi fas passed sufficiently, and as if more would
sation in the rectum as if it would protrude ; this

iD

come. Sen-

i
cy
3
z
=
:
;
.
Fs

take place; upon straining, a few hard clots came out. (a. 12 h.)

ninany Oroans : Frequent desire to urinate, with but
little urine being emitted. (a, 2h.) Tenesmus of the bladder,
followed by the emission of a quantity of white urine ; tenes-
mus afier micturition. (a. 36h,}—140, Orange-colored urine,
which becomes easily turbid. (a. 24h.) Burning after mic-
turition ; one is bor gore ma to urinate, although but
a few drops are emitted each time; they cause a burning at

Scie Oroans: Itching of the scrotum,  Stiches,
sometimes itching of the prepuce. Voluptuous itching of the
tip of the glans, which forces one to rub ; it oceurs when

ng in the open air. (a. 6} b—145.) ‘Traction in the
loft spermatic cord alternating with twitches, accompanied by
sees mehr shivering in the neighboring parts of the sero-
T 7

um
Tunoar: Stitch in the epiglotts. H which is
oceasioned by much phlegm in the throat, (a. 10h.) Vitilla-
tion in the larynx, inducing a dry, and hacking congh
and continuing for a jong time. (a. 2¢h.) A short and hack-


--- Page 53 ---
thrusts in the stern a the dorsal ce
inwards. (a. 36 hi.) ian of heart, when sit-

ing or stooping, acco’ by a I sensation, as if the
heart were conrad. 170, ‘he Behe palpitation of the heart,
in the evening, when lying in bed ; it decreases when sitting
up. Painful thrust in th the region of the heatt When mak

under the upper uv teruum ; he feels a
pain like a dull still stiteh or (a 72h.) Sense as
of trembling, internally, during an

; the inspiration seems to be divided into two



--- Page 54 ---
-

=
eeliiiize veil

ogee
Be

i
gis

:

eS Er , 1 ; See | iy ti ing Rs |
wk, near the axilla; he finds it difficult to

Bz9.

Necx : Pretty. violent trenmilations in the muscles of the neck,
on the loft side. pane ibscince gee cas _ of the
when at rest. Serie) ‘Dull stitehes between the top of the
between the seapule and in the nape of the neck, early in the
morning, when in bed; when rising, she was unable to move

er ATT (the pain, nor was she able to tum her
tieelk, the: Py forenoon ; symptom occurred several


--- Page 55 ---
46 ANGUSTURA,

the arm feels as if one had held a heavy weight faces
hand for a long time ; ies eceae ons

the joints <e e elbow a nese Inssitude of tho
ane Pain sapere

Ske nocinees hehad where! idiom agrina wornething

this pain incteases by moving the arm or leaning upon it ate
walking in the opon air.) (a. 24 h.)—-200, "Traction i
fore-arm and in the hand, like a cramp, ‘I'raction in one of
the fingers of the let hand. peng page a naredbee
othe as if it were torn out. Pain in ong ws

ag ashe as is on si hen Sm “t

= r insensible, num asi

The Hing Pressive cutting in the aha

gh cy ue et bruise. (a. be i a

arm feels heavy, when one is walkin ci pant a

outside, in the region of the Roser as

being pulled down when left yrs (a, 4h,) Fine itching

of tet aries which passes off ying, h.) Pine tear-
in the arms, a: bones, and worse

at rest than ieee guts Si in
rand iapararoliy io t(a.7h.) Feel
of heaton the dorsum of rg yin ate: hh)

drawit pressure upon the dorsum of the right
eve 4 Dull wr gt

frout of the wrist-joint, (a. +h, fin; sitet ha
are cold to the touch, i ah
215. Aching, internally, in

left thamb, (a. + h.

ts if it were sprained, ott

domen, and of the thigh leg, feel: blows,
and, when walking, Grote Wate Gabon, Repro
matic dra pain. (a. 1th.) Sudden and las-
situde in the nie gerade oe fei cp ese
spine. fa 2b.) 22). Dull s0 as far as the dorsal
pape cy li Fp eg stitches in the left os innomina-
tum, mig 3s lt va the stitches hari short pa-
roxyrs are ine very motion. upper
of the hip-joint feels naa fH we jit aia
unfit for walking.

ga yak teat “Press, draw
ing pain in. upon nsing froma
oes ehh ese te a ees

in persis Pear amery sts dere


--- Page 56 ---
ee 47

ta a at

The. zat r museles of the
ith als ae nful tension when mov!
het ey ee ey more in the
ie wos we eth in motion. (a. 2 h,)—230-
ee ee the external ‘side of ‘the thighs Bien.
ike pain in the middle of the
, only. owhen walking. Loe es 2
nuisele of the thigt ‘when stretching the pat ie
ching of the thigh, which goes by abbing ene ye =
walk fast ; atet ct to ae Ascent
greenest of Voc pe wi en wang in
a, 13h.) Intermittent Lae ars shag
“when walking in the opin ait. (a. 6 bh.) henge in
traction from below in the calf, and also in
a Seeing frown: tha bend off the knee,
need by a contraction of the li

menits, ‘the middle of the bend of the knee, as far as:
alf, bo Bi or gt in motion, te Wheeden.
rats Is a ke | chan elon

i gg

evening, when sitting. (a. “12 b)

Barly in the moming, when eras Ber ut, she feels a draw-

cand | in the joints of feet, with heat in the

ts, and a sensation as if they were luxated ; age pire
ions ost gatesy rence ae hanvaains

ng 28 a , in n ing

in the air, (a, 2th.) Paralysis of the joints of the feet.

Dull drew sdicises ts tie int of the right foot, when sit-


--- Page 57 ---
Swalking, Shs od the h Suehonsities sitting, oe.

we =e ster Sapcmat == -
ce ret

whole gid Wea
of the bones het ef aa yoeP igee and
One fools excessively tired after \

se runing ba toot alieseeee m

ps in the sin the tring, whine t
aut any kind ke SO


--- Page 58 ---
He ay
a BSS 75 fe ;



--- Page 59 ---
30 ARGENTUM.

Warmth of the body, except

Upon entering the room, in the e

he knows not what to do with
. thirst, (a. 2d.)

+ -

; the cheeks were cold.’
i, he feels a great heat ;
but he experiences no

Mona ioe Seah i, dst and Hesitation, be
.) Disco: i ren

es

ee gis Bagh

AZ bh. r rightened, 2
‘ . 1 starts.— ight
— acta re Pig 3

ARGENTUM. |

ears hee being unable to:
inn form,
ion have, speculatively, i
more pro
Having been

{nts If, at first, with using

se _

P ae

: ,

eee
od that A sents or

he deta, Wy 8 the eld serio penne vette

of peda sc degies, eat ve me an oppor-

ty of obvetving the few subjoined sym

the assertions of our

‘theoreticians,

who ype nie the stomach as a cooking or ues recone
Filled with juice which cannot, Pomibly, dissolve in the
‘Moruch what it has not been able to dissolve in the crucible—

‘ having ‘tritur fed one gram of

the stomach, sent forth,

sugarof milk. ‘The interesting oa toms ok have

smart by this trituration, will

iN regatny efi
vital ie ls

— rade

ar rene ‘This appeared to bes eaceieaa

5 A ise Reaction of the vital
* Nore: Reuetion of the vital

~

pointed out a =

this
wane: ie to the renetion hg ac

ied


--- Page 60 ---
sil oxalate 2 dows Re eenoo:

he cme mpi hich the nitrate [ silver enjoys,
ar ee
con w

i aa ay a fae ming cnr

be np & '

uretio . coming ne
uate to Ping which they are

manent cure ean be effected, ; which are
ble of produci ge ina Huai panied treet symp-
toms analogous to those of the disease.
Some forms of dinbetes can be permanently cured by silver,
sss the other concomitant ptoms are also indicated.
According to Noack and ‘Trinks, the nitrate of silver sg
exhibited in epilepsy — RY -somacayetit Ltd abdominalis,—
sontery, ‘eryaipelabots inflammations of the skin. —Asth
perfil = Cine cations fo the hea with vertigo.—Op
ia; Ophthalmm neonatora
Seger! ee rene any the a
nervous and. inflammatory kind ; periodic gastrodynia—
the gonital organs. - - Asthma ; Angina

faioaou nemnpirs: Atgentum.—Aln. Alum. Natr.

‘mur, Pee Rertorae Mere. corr. Natr. m ae ae.
Hahnemann Chat the eS bee symp

Pires head the agg gn iwoukd

Tercscatimen er sty alg t) Obscura

on ea ht, accompanied by anguish, heat of the face and

lachry: Sensation as if the velum palatis were swol-


--- Page 61 ---
52
len, only when mo) the | hen’swallowing.—5.
Seneation is ull the lta as fT would go to sluep and be-
come rigid. Fsintshiness a the afternoon, Profuse night-
sweat. me fiat cruuinhe 2 3:

vi

Geceneacions oF OTHERS. . ;
Vv accompanied passing blindness
taseealy Diedioag: gus ne rit were a aie

—Chronic, inflammator
and mouth ; Syphilitic ulcers of the faue
ALOGOUS MEMEDIES int. Zine. Asafoe
Chi ne ac. Nux v. ate Sa u oon .
elt suddenly giddy, and as if « mist 4
(tie pe Vertiginous d drowsiness ; his eyes been

ue feel a ti fei dl a i his hea o
Peis 4
| si era co rl ain ae

sternum, such as is
in a eitele; ; at the
hole of the body, but

experienced after tamning gay ro -
ew


--- Page 62 ---
|
a

2
es

i

i

and lower eyelids are very red and
; however, the eyes do not suppurate,) Violent itching in

: nt nd itchiig in ‘the nose was followed by

Face: Painful, gnawing pressure on the bones of the face

:-¥

aoe


--- Page 63 ---
Bd ARGENTUM. _

of the right side ; be the re is
h.) "Tearing at the ygoma
Lage ry e ¥
al etfichea f n ag right molar bone,
ha errs tet “40. —Violent itching of the external ear ; he Gaia
until the parts bleed. Culting stitches from the internal ear of
the left side as far ns the brain. Sensation in the bs eng
if it wale atopageal A sort of pressive ten: the left
pens at a small ‘hits: (a. 12 h.) Corrosive ching: of the
on” both ears early in the morning, ot rising. (a.

3 AND TEETH :—45; A drawi

Cu

snhma. a
age: nary tas r parts 1
F deglutition is, at the same time, made dificult, as if
ere internal swelling Bi the ck ar fe ty fo
pert sees if heeled ie he thevat a, 48
or arace:

erie a yt fats cite ration and
during degluti eer and rawness of Pas con-

th the peng ay. Sense asof bene the volun pen-
Jum palati, as if ean ney wee ee it; it was not a
; bie sensation, and was more felt during
an empty deglutition than when swallowing a morsel, but the

sensation was felt coustantly, and.
liv i fe hows say eae rainy the

throat—60. 1
the faces 48 of Nail

one foels a painfu Sek 8

TASTE AND apeerire? speech is im impeded on aceuniiit

of much viseid saliva sectimntatth in aba
accumulates in his mouth ; this syrnptom n les ki


--- Page 64 ---
snares. 55

Hace ging Ro whole any! wh whi cannot be
cae iy be aleve t time by ‘eating —70.
an ‘ we) when
when os ste (Tih) Almost continual
al ee wb g of nausea in the t 3 '

Pigiy tae by ses

i s ay ae te reel lnkgreded

Neat leaves he oontirrusl sense of

Usivin

the: Chntracti¢n
of the sibdomtoal muscles when oe A: so that
stooping.—90, Sharp “hate aay out-
muse

ion, in the dae Se if the of


--- Page 65 ---
56 ARGENTUM.

it feels painful as if it had been: relied: Straining in the hy-
pogastrium ee: & pretty soft evacuation, and even after-
wards, (a. 7

‘sabi 708 Prequent and always successful dane
stool in the lower port of the rectum, with ea on of a

tity of soft, stool, continuing for sey sargliar ban (a. 2 at

Stoo | after scl which is very y, but
passes off without any trouble. (a. 8 h.

Urtwary organs: Frequent mici . (a, 6 h) Fre-

guint seine to ene and copious rr af urine, for
hours. (a. 2h.)

Gexerative roxerrons: Poll at . without

lewd dreams.—100, Pata in the Joh texle Saint

Rontson (a. 49 hb.) Effusion of semen almost every night.
Conn, win) The ee in tna ‘fac —woulk

come on, (a, nose Is @ part 0 if

both nostrils; ” eee as of gh safe pstril,
is constantly full ope

iw eg ene eet hieo. days.

te connate os —Li0. When stooping, mr
emcee aes whir. ek e single fit
Irritating, short, hacking cough, any ¢
engey Sei too nicwhtag after rising from the bed. |
mh saline woe, take ite form of a stitch,
rom. below aap 8 two or three
}; that. pain continues even after: }; the
noes a kind of watery Mb) which, how-
scores and

soreness of the larynx, especial y et ooasting Sioa
So ing not ubers swallowing. Seyeral attacks o
short, rat — by day, not in the night, nor in the open
air, accompanied by white, thickish, loose expectoration, loo
like’ boiled starch, lee Pits without any taste or
—115. Cough early in the monting.

sho tray

the left side when sideways and leaning on the !
reper pig rpc belly: aherwasts

fe y violent, 0 ve stitches, ocourring at "he least
tion or Ei g, so that he had to walk crooked ; one
lying still it seemed as if there were a griping in those parts


--- Page 66 ---


--- Page 67 ---
58
niger near the rere cl cx, especially when ~

dis back, fae toa > meu?

bee art, the p is simply

re the posterior
bo 1 in he sl { the back. (a. 4h,) Sensation
us if the vi and back had been spe baa (a-24 h).
“Ms. Dull stitches in the second lumbar vertebra,
Sore on Exraemrries : aii foe and itehing: sa
viv or muss ;
rw epee ct eae hing. Tensive traction
olen aces the ann fain eae “Spuasmo-
how as apap pi the Ded fh
Wy a had hoot violently sprained by t
rod ie pee yf testing motion, more when ext
than when Actes drawing ant saaes
pain in the bends: Pabaee (it is felt in every. Maine
af the wa) hi, baa the parts, the
a
of ins eli ne Sharp 4 ees ot heh ee ae i
e seapu
Po ac w

fen is felt won a 34 asta shal from the hon
ingling of ganache 8 ne to s
i= on the top of the sh ae i coplony of ths

ead of the the humerus,—155, in ihe moi meet
aoe scapula, which extends as ara Borin

ivicle, g
hes in the ghee lt which did not ey off when the parts

Were touched, ete Tearing ache below the shoulder-
fate Continued in the right npper arm. (a. 1h.)
ink dnt the et upper arm,—160, Burning, quickly passing

frout, in the middle of the left upper arm. hocieg -
ir hee of he ppc, whe tnsrasce oy coat Cramp
pay matnetog gage tars ys ; otherwise the
Fiat is scarcely felt, (4.10h.) Paral nd
ducing mete, € ially in the elbow-joint. (a. 32h.) A sort of
paralysis of arm and hand; it drops, and he has. to
eet ars tation for the purpose of writing. (a. 3 h.}—165.
bending the arm, there is a tension, externally, at the

muscles situa 1 process of the ulna,
and the trochiea of the humerus. (a. 31h.) Not long contain,

jerking. tearings, apparently in the bony processes forming the


--- Page 68 ---
s 1 ‘+ ; : - parr ey ye
teres) oe 2h.) “in the
aly: Bo ede week kita take esa he
tg pF eg gg eons cle t hand and fo
in com 2:
earl bie posing the wri

. a i | «rnd hig” to
mere Teaiae
nt ers icky

bone of ‘the: fo rth,

1 Of set | muscles, it of the ri ht chighe
sl af a eh accom

by a sensation as of gurgling en literal translation ;
another peculiar sort of vibration,) when sitting, (immediately,
sta Ah wa incisive pain over the iy knee, on both sides,
sites not move the mes (a. $ h.)—180. Tearing ©
pe over the left patella, in aay position. Tearing in
> gv niting eae .) ‘The knee is
ia ha beon bruised worse when sitting ad

walling toa a (a. it h) ac oe oan Phase darn t

wards, in the muscles yo Bai Eetity wher sitting —
Hie experiences bur

F when in.
1e6, io Becoming, left eee from the kneo, whic


--- Page 69 ---
¥,
.

60

eaused an ingens sags pnigs 09 (a. 17 he) Set

were too short. Pain as

fi
the joints of the feet, feet, worst whet ation. Ce

in the left calf, w cg Sooo es 4h.) 7
eg down sai | sees pai ful ,

accompanied by tingling and stinging of the skin of the tibim,

wernt ih Ai Sea gm motion, (a. 14h,
“daa? prop tandimbee nye ernie ers
,and as if the cartilage of the joints

5 when walking. © ‘Stitches in: cape in

iar
besa from within coments: sitting, almost not felt
when walking ; the cutting is worst when the foot ix ritdes

tappis earrow lath? (a. some h.) 'T:
the

soles, at times in the dorsa, or in fot
in
cially in their posterior ed tae in aire ma ee:

the does sii

is: ming maton te lanier otra °Volont

"baring in the coe, in paroxysins, eveu without an =e asure

for twenty-four hours,—195.. ae nips weakness in the hip

pity) Pain nth hel whet epping upon hot ong
a in ee

as if it wore pithy, (continued,)

Gexecnat Symeroms: Lassitude and heat all over, when
walking in the open air; he has no sweat, and a a
sort of anguish, as if his clothes Lge rae bg
toms reappear every day about noon.— 200, Intolerable ite ing,
as from a flea walking over the head, and the whole body,
Boraing teing, nee and there,on the skin; for instance,

of the fi ce, the ete. ; this did not, how-
pee make s¢ratching necessary, - sort of tearing ache at
the. extremities of the ina bones, over or below their joints,
in different parts of the sae (a, 48h.)
4 Lig heared Great bere of the body,
especially of the thighs, when sitting or w with somno-
leone aah dels anes laziness in all the limbs.

ius deans on Marfa waking up he aie ft, asin at he

the
a Syers rede acide ha nt reed abut

even, when in bed, he could not get warm; sweat
night. Chills over the upper sete of the cars angle


--- Page 70 ---
talk the ies tay (a. Son et ( n
rd, she is excessively Dede sake!
‘contrary happens.) ¢

air se jak S Saiaceeibles freon oe its smell and its
medicinal virtues; arpa it ee ee The
seek ga ipowde wing Seely cone thad
peso si ea eae! Ie cpt
well oopede bottles, without sng 3 its
power, .
. ‘The theories, ae % and sophiatio. wpects
‘, lations af the oldschool have dot ben able, nthe centuries of

o

i woud by balls oF blunt ioaira ~
#; itis also eminently useful ancy
teeth, or other eu operations, in
been violent, operations as re-
ete



--- Page 71 ---
All the symptoms a ening violent aggre F toarl An.
of the size, aie one vthy
organismns, as parolee ie |
In great contusions the cure m by giving
small dose of Amnica intemally, ree | roe days
and then mixing half a pou of wat an equal quan
need of brandy or wine, and sonnet ns this liq ae o
n drops of the one hundreth potence of the solution of Arica.
imparting, to the whole mixture about ten shakes,

be advantageously employed “t nM
a isedins ; it isa polye Its eifect ‘does, not .
th to ea

d six days but, nevertheless, Thave ari
ispensable intermediate mney in the most —
chronic diseases,

‘> _ frought never to be used in purely silideltwsory a acute

diseases, characterized by ral heat; nor ought it
to orcad it diarrhan, In aflecti Amica will always
poiuicogh the reason of this may be foun dn the’ follow-

a tine il xen tl in sme Kin of pio

re hi med aaa ee footer
sa Ww 0
othe et pene you mn wali the nih be it capa ron
ot io w t ‘
petrige! = a or, if the abtnd ers 0 be “ory

you mu _aapesalin ten of the finely powdered extract-
ng its Feadticinal v ma
igs ats Sei space sates pe ingens oes
ry; of this extract you then petri ynatnizing it u

to the deeillionth degree, according to the well shown ie,
Two or three globules moistened with a dilution of th this degree,
are sufficient at a dose.

Camphor is an antidote; ‘Ripe senmmgnee tbe effeets of

Arnica.”
Hahnemann, ri nummer, raghanes W ivenus. |
Noack and ‘Trinks offer the fol ng remarks on Arnica,

Arnica is suitable when the nervous. system, the animat as

well as the vegetative, is in a state oft torpidity. It is suit-
able for those stages of in ammation where the vital powers
begrin to become’extinet, where torpid Liat or neurop hoes
sets in; under these seonadiae the is the contrary of
Aconite, which corresponds to the boda inflamimatar

especially the vovtibet a) character. Arnica ix especial y

H dpc of one thousand drops of —


--- Page 72 ---
es i m

f ARNICA MONTANA. 63

wueful in the so-called status gastricus hereon eae i
7 ap gw h theory: fer rain
tyme oric young people, with a a
de pe ean tem raiment to ex ol vidal tha yes have
weaken tC, i yellow, ace. As
cra asthe flo ih blows, contusions, ete. Arnica
ts Rhus Toxic. apg Acidum sulph. “i
ee Catendula officinalis, Ruta, Ledum and
hus, however, corresponds more to the !
attending aneztension af membranous tissues, expecia
the ligaments of the joints; Conium is more suitable for
contusions which produce a condensation of the cellular
tissue and induration agg a structures, accompanied
by a sensation of numlness. Symphy yum answers more the
pressure and contusion of bones ; Calendula is suitable for
sugillations, bloody and serous bufiltrations of the cellular
tissue in apon wounds and pel Ruta we know to be a
specific in cases of mechanical in, of the pee Soran and car-
pal joint, and in rheumatic par: these parts; Ferrum
muriaticum ia especially useful in a prains affection of the
shoulderjoint, and Ledum, when the hip-joint is the seat of
thowe se Searle Coneussions of the brain and the spinal
marrow.— ic — paralytic fits, convul-
Pons and tremor of ‘dhe Uensbs,; eben consequent upon conens-
sions and —Trumatic convulsions. —Epilepsy,
after spaabantcs! injuries, —Ttanns,—'Trismus,—Precursory
symptoms of ya even the o hervesa, sanguinea,
serosa, when fully developed.— Atonic hemorrhazes.—Nere-
ous, gastric oi utrid fevers. Status nervasus stupidus,
fever accom by violent pleuritic stitches at overy inspi-
ration, party ogee pulse, t exhibiting brown
streaks in the t thirst, trembling of mt heh
gathering of flocks in a air, sages eng oo stool, ete,—Inte
tent fovers, Sram after the by
Quinine.— fv especialy with n gastrico-bilious
character, ae fever. glare i ica aa mak and
oul especially with inflammatory erysipelatows
pte lling of the a0 nee ib rts.— Frozen limbs.—Consequences
of oi ee ie “ion on the abuse o ine gh fa
fs children at) easles with dun
patos! od ptunlatieso rations —Furune es
—Ulears taf sei charactor. —Decubitus.—Stings 6 sd

insects.—Melancholia oer uent upon injury of the h
fright, onanism, su ‘the usual evacuations and obsti-
nate constipation.—Frenzy oe parturient women, accompanied


--- Page 73 ---
% ARNICA wow tans
; exec ot Ree ci kinds of ctetral affoc on

sh gi more adya

ine ines of the wl i Th.

et rw gee Ser upon e

i Ue w brain. —Bleeding at the w
by a fall or a contusion.—

tous upon the pit of the ston

and spe pains in the pit of megceae cal ie cmd

um; constant pausea ; frequent empty Some a =) ally
night; vomiting, even when eating ever so little; slo

ish mood and i

poi gringo Cardialgia consequent.

tric ious conditions—Cardialgia

rig Sagepiad or loss of Prgendey ceigr at stitches
rous and mucous enteritis ; pr dysente

cially with a typhoid character, ison Ghacacortced oe Ging

and iar involuntary, stools, d with

black blood, and having a cadayerous smnell, slig a tan

teorism,
we anes, pale, dt disfigured countenance, acovlera an

eo viscous, cold swent
an ytie diarrbat.—Lienteria (1)—Retention of of urine,
with « feeling of fullness of the bladder, and inability to emit
pom urine ; ixchuria hemorrhoidalis ; ischuria traumaties.—

turia consequent upon external injuries. Inflammatory

swelling of the testes.—Hmmatocele consequent upon extuenel
yess: antennas of the genital Re Se after a difficult
After-pains in a long, difficult, se ca RL when
occasioned by the fetus fri tiechanically tipon the parts —
Acco to several o ore GRE ee oe
agninst after-pains ; according to Gross and Lobethal, Secale
and Pulsatilla ought to be used ; Gries says that Ariica
has helped in some cases, According to Emmerich, Arnica is
es i ta Pee hessoaahvard thase
gi pg and paralytic ea ich com-
mence in of the back and the igi and extend down
along the inten bein the thigh as far ae ne 8 these
pains are accompanied by neryous uneasiness in the extremi-
ties ; the patient knows not how to rest them; there is css


--- Page 74 ---
fr eng cr. 7
* Axatoe s Remenres:; Amm. Ars, Cann. Cape. Chin.
ei Phong, Pa Rhus. Sabin, Samb. Stites Stap.
erat.— - zt. Be teen Gon wate Rote Oe
Bg err. #. Hyose. atr. Natr. mur. Nox

Oo Snip. ne. Zine, —B, Lach. Nite. Nitr. ac.
cee so Fantsn it Con Pecbd, aps

{ w. the fore

ony when walki ip Mas tums with her, and threat-
to fall over wi her. Vertigo ; it is almost imperce i

when sting and tending the png over; but when ri Tight
moving the , she if every thing tumed wit her
&. Vertigo. Oblasion of the head Obtusion of the head,
renee and anguish are aggravated by artificial vomiting.
headache, early in the morming. Heaviness in the
ai.h.) He is ie absorbed in a revery, although
Saami, 'y speaking, of nothing. Want of memory ;
ord which he is about speaking. icige ed o

bere he cannot direct his thoughts long to one object.
traction of the pupils, with obnubi tion of the head, and ob
tusion of one of the skull. ee



--- Page 75 ---
e . s*

o ARN 7. MONTANA. |
d distended ards. * Burning in

cae soap saa iin ou hing oo nes not »

* Heat in the head € see mrs
, or on << Sia hot,— 20, beeen I eadache in the
an. + Bw
ste cron in the os
eAching! in the forehead, which >
as if the bram were rolled up ina lum
the head were being distended from)

) ‘ ore 7
seems to emanate from something soft in the ve with trae-
tion in the occiput, and tearing towards the temple Headache
over the eyes extending towards the temples
oy the integuments of the forchea were
ed. opaa h.) First, ncn Aingexash ve
stitching aw
chilliness, (a. 8 h.) ncn iy th in the grieved daar cel when
walking, or the stairs, reflecting or eke!
— a the right of the fiocitad bone 5 a
pressure then moved into the | saarwanteti! enn
Width ear! (a3 (a2 d.)—B0, Aching, wit teuetion, Inthe left half of
the skull, beginning at the ear and coming out at the top of the
head. (a. 3h.) Stu dull, continued pain in a
head, more ex y. (a. 54h.) Headache, externally,
the top of the head. Sneezing twice in succession ; his i
followed by a pain in the left side of the forehead
ae knock against senting. * Violent aiiches. in the
rt of the head, when (a, 7 he . Violent
i es in the head, Shenson (a. 10h, Headache ;
stitches extending upwards ; they came Ng again when co
ing or moving the head, and can only be assuaged b
the head wpon the painful side. Prick eg wie ee
which becomes worse by lifting up the eyes, with heat in the
fave and thirst. * Stitches in the forehead. stitehes
in the forehiead.—40, Jerking stitehes in the a
Headache as if a nail had heen thrust into the a scram one
sree by general sweat, about midnight; thisis followed by
tishiness, (a, someh.) Headache in aria eons return-
ng from time to time, abrir, Sand fae yp (a. 4 h,)
Sti in the temporal region, ng each other in nid
ie sche lta nen, neem Bc tine .
stitches tal eminence, accompinied by the oo
sation as if ar vasation of blood had taken place in the
pi i in the forehead. ll stitches

in Sn mples, (a: 1. h.) Jer lancinating headache, .
when stooping, as if every dhe WO bore fo from the fore-



--- Page 76 ---
: ring of the k

is. (a 2h, ‘eyes, denoti ! The
Poth ejlids along i eof eoutet wih the eyeball
totemalles tora

when the lids are moved, as
too dry and a little sore.—70. *Contraction of the

if they were
is, sith ob-

nubilation of the head. Sharp, fine stitches in the internal ean-—
thus: He fels well diring the siests, ns long: as tho'eyes wore.

closed; opening them was gare of the
stomach. = of the 8 (8. 26h.) Stitches in the
Itching of the canthi. (a. 27 h.) = Rai in the

eyes. Burning in the eyes, without a Occasional

low af tears, hich burn like fire, et prot iepacntghie=
eee it looks more elevated and larger the left.—S0,
‘pain in the a Pthroorall she * Painful, dul,

de pressive ichings oe antes te letcene, aoe aaet bos

aeamdigon over the bal Gt thn ove?
a Face and Nose : Pain, internally, in the cari

he left ear, as if the parts had been bruised or contused.



--- Page 77 ---
- e

ee ARNICA MONTANA.

cu pressure in both ears, in the region
(a. 10 ae “Dull stiches rough the
1 In Stite arting throug then oh e ur, the Bb
fins through the eyes, with a feeling in the eyes as
were turned upwards by force. Heat and burning:
Bae ig bok hn sapeaincsee sige however, is not)
(a1 et fen ate nae premise ear.— 90. stitches,

senubly di

(a. 10 bh.) esata
in the loft ear. (a 3h. Humming in the ears. (a. 7 h.)
Feeling of heat erm of the left ear and in the cheek. Exrup-
saps Sante toingtis bce es ayy
the in a, +
100. ‘Throbbing and pinching m the swollen cheek, as if two
hammers beat against each other, the flesh. Pain as
from bruises, in a the articulation ‘of the rig tam when moving
the jaw to and fro, early in the morning, (a. 20h.) Redness
and burning in one cheek, the body being cool, or, at op! rute,
not hot, Red swelling of one cheek with throbbi Seapets
re pain, Stages WP and great heat in the head, with a cold
; the feet felt sometimes hot. Thrills of heat over the
head, ‘with rete gathering in the face.—105. Thrills of heat
in the face, in the evening. (a. 36h.) jae cei ee
ree of bata) ri When yawning “ss rye tere
a. i over t cheek,
shivering wie coldness, pr as far as the side of the
t, (a. 6h.) Cramp-like ee at the root of the nose.
h.j—110. The nose pains him from above dmemwards,
i Mi hed hed a btatenl fall peat Laueinating pain in
the nose. * Swelling of the tose, Sense as if the Scat were 2
ulcerated ; the nose is sore within. Pimples in the nose and
‘under the nose, Which are filled with pus at the tips, with a
biting pain,—115, Feeling of heat in the nose ; however, it is
cold to the touch. * Frequent bleeding at the nose. Dull pres-
sure on the nasal bone, with stupefaction. Feeling as if an
eccery were crawling near the nose; this cannot be removed by
ath il on the side of the nose, going off by

ale "The ext ! paces of the upper sd the lp when etl ae
i VECOTIL: -
Hon ch er (0 gh ay” i Bi
, With redness all

the groove af the hi gn Se the |
and a pie oath: Parehed lips.—125, Chapped



--- Page 78 ---
tion, © tongue.
Movrst: seaien i a9 fot without an thirst.—L50,
ae. in the mouth, with great ad ¥ coated white,
Wis wquhapiutiecnigea aes. . (add. ‘Drynessin the
mouth early in the ea Gate without any thirst, the taste in the

ee dling Sonsation of dryness on the
tip of the tongue. in th hare the lips, with shivering over
thearmsand thighs. {a.2h.) Biting sensation on the tongue,
& Ah.) 155. gm as of the ngue being sore. (a. 4h.
colin in the palate as of hey iy ole having to
the parts. (ee h.) Sipe of the velam pendulum palati,
Barni back part of the throat, a senate) apo,
py ed = ~ "ep of anguish w which o gp ros er
without eat being perceptible external!
pact othe thiseet, ustneet ie acts So asllow a4
the fauces as if something hard or rough (ex. a crust of

ze
a

Hi


--- Page 79 ---
70 _  ARNICA MONTANA.

lodged in it, in the
seo) we off when tsi, wah. en pes eb

Jeg lutition is prevented by a sort of sg de yf
the fod vod would not 0
A

srric Symvroms: Bitter taste in the mouth ear!
after waking Putrid, slimy taste in the mouth.—1
(Every thing wBhich he takes, tastes sour.) re ips Repugnance: to
milk.) specter! Mean peri is repugnant to him. * R
pecs to meat sso Desire for vinegar —170. Want of
petite in the ing. Want of a e, the tongue being
peer white and valine: Difficult deglutition. _ of rot-

ten eggs in the mouth, between the meals. egm in the ,

throat; it tastes bitter when hawking it up. ey 12 h.)\—175.
* Bitter taste in the rnouth. Shireen blood. (a, 2d.)
A kind of sup imperfect hiccough afierdinner. *
eructations. (#,+h.) arate oneesteane- 100. f
the eructations a bitter ph isgulped up. * Evnpty eructa~
tions. * Early in the mo , eructations, tasting of rotten
eggs. Gulping up of water.—185. Nausea ‘and dispo-
sition to vornit early in ates! Hear-burn. She wants
to drink constantly, but she knows not what, because every
thing is offensive to Half- eructations, Enor-
posi “pean in the crening the meal, one is immedi-
ately affected with a f of repletion, and a colic-like pres-
sure in several places of the abdomen, especially hesiden—
190. noon, during dinner, mer cheek is affected with a per-
le degroe of warmth.) er A fe she weeps, is nev
ish, sedan to nobody, ed donk sek to be told any thing.
Complete want of te with nausea, * Nausea, Qualmish-

ness of the st , with empty eructations—195. Nausea
without vomiting, or without stool, He feels a vertigo
it nausea, when too long. * eae to vomit,

unto vomiting. omiting. * Vomiting of coagulated
blood. ply retching. (a. +h.) "+ Rething at night vyom-
iting, however, does not come on; in the pit of her stomach,
there is a weight as of a lump. Violent pressure on the ster
num, over the pit. Violent jerks under the stomach.— 205.
Sense as of in the pit; as if something were

rolled up there like a ball of thread, After a meal, Pate

the pit of the stomach, and Soe = peegee

in the by Linonetiately te pares pula tin oe
tieddoe bh i ma when s' and constantly ex-
cites micturition.

Stromacn: ing ree of the stomach, accom-
panied by loathing. wei in the pit of the stomach


--- Page 80 ---
ach) (immed

stomach. — 2 in the pereon a the the

squeezed ta it got stator ew Oppression of
the heart. padre an hic emaact in the stomach (im-
paged —215. Grunting in the with colic. Aching,

the pit of the
is Sam in th ered ne tan
ilo ae ‘Sense as of digging in the pit of the stom-

(a.4 h,) ee eerie oleae hig aids Dace

boa fei of a. ron Se stomach.
Pre gallo resem-
stitch, when wa cag » Stitches

tinder the fa false ribe of the left a side, ing. the breath,
hen standing. wing thro e, between
tha pit i tha eubalach, and dh ics Sera

umbilicus, especially when ‘eating deeply at ¢
step, but nuither immediately, before br sto) 225,
Cutting in the abdomen as after a cold. Colic resembling
dysentery ; a kind of ling deep in the hypogastrium,
within the hips, on both si accompanied by nausea and
slumber, (Between Zand 5.h,) *'Tension and inflation of the
aa abi brand BN Zar ) of hours after a
moderate supper, accompanied by i ea pressure in
pari erpecaly athe cele eta without any
tlatus being distinctly felt, "This Sonia during
the night, with heat of the limbs and dreams, which fhtigue the
mind; he wakes up every hour; the inodorous flatus which
pe affords him no relief. ‘Tense distention of the right
side of the abdomen, when at rest; the part is painful as from
an internal wound ; when coughing, blowing the nose, or sot-
ing down the foot, it feels painful os if it had been shaken,
torn or ee ; itis even,painful when merely touched
! , and feels as if one cut intoa wound ; the pain is re-
eved by the: emission of flatulence, and rages every day from
morning until two o'clock in the afternoon Pain in the region
cece ae ie
nj in tw
Mo piesa Seah naverhilade Ri
hunery, as if she had not eaten any thing—bnt she felt as if
she i drank a good: deal ;, sense as of swashing in the body,
‘Tearing in the a n overthenayel. V iolent cutting in the

Hy


--- Page 81 ---
72 ARNICA MONTANA,

left side of the abdomen, which darted up
as far as the vertex, so that he jr ejpiten 2 up ]
electric spark. (a. 24h.) Pine parties u

lent jerk below the stomach.— Pain in ‘the right side of
the abdomer!, as from a sudden contusion, when walking. (a,
26h.) Clawing throbbing on the left ote between the pit of
the stomach and the umbilicus. Sharp stitches in both a
(a. 3h.) Pain in the loins, cutting from without iftward
pecially when stooping. (a. 60h.) Dull stitches in the

side, below the ribs—240. Sharp thrusts th the abdo-
men from one side to the ue ae. (a. et pain in
the region of the liver. (a. 2d.) Burni in the
epigastric region, Retraction + rey um ee tearin
in the abdominal museles, (a. 1 h,)—245. Pine stitch

the which leaves an een earl a
off by seratching. (a. th) Colic; an hour afterwards

mus; at last an evae of fivces composed of small
mixed with a fe -Flatos, rumbling in the abdomen.

Colic, ay from inearcerated flatus. Colicky pains,
owing 4 flatu —250. Granting, rumbling in the’ ab-
domen, sandionte. Fermenting flatus in the abdomen. Lond
grunting Pm the abdomen, as from emptiness. fa, 10 h)

re es fermenting flatus, below the umbilical region.
a LL

Sioa: ‘Tenesmus, with emission of flatulence; previ-
ously grunting in the intestines, (a. 1 h.)—256, Flatas smell-
ing like rotten eggs. (a. 3h.) ‘Tenesmus ; this is followed by
“i aK 8, thin or pap-like, sourish-erpelling stool, giving great

; (every day part five times.) ‘Tenesmus. ‘Tenesmus

every valf hour; but nothing except slime was H
difficult stool, with | pressure in the abdomen. (E30 b,)200,
Pap-like diarrhea, with of the abdomen previous to

stool, * Pap-like, brown stool, with grumbling in the abdomen,
be Jeeta. eame on, (a. 14h.) ag in the rectum, e
Frequent, small stools, consisting or of slime. (a. 6,

; i. —265, Frequent stool; after every he is obliged to
lie, * White diarthaadike sa rahe see Rae!
bling brown yeast.) * Constipation, Ni with
straining colic, as if from ilatulence. Piuiuas ool

ae

at night, when asleep, * Undigested stools, although not
Straining in the rectam. ‘Tenesmus of the reetum. sr

_ pressing che fsa aie? (a7 h, oF,

‘ate: Diarrhea, with copious expulsion of fi a
the administration of Arai & pashan of the Pentex Ie ppeare to be, in


--- Page 82 ---
. Tenesn us of the neck of the bladder, * Tenesmus
the bladder, the urine dropping out involantarily. (a.1
has to stand a good while before some urine is emitted. De

urine; he isable, especially at night, to retain ita long time. (a.

riepeinopol order * Brown urine with brick-red sediment.
A small quantity: red urine. Frequent emission of white
which Be had drunk; the last ¢ ck gcse Uae tae
out easly. (‘The first 4h.) Barly in the morning he emits a

“Frequen ate, with emission of a smaller
quantity of yellow-red urine, (a. 46 mo Itching in the anterior
Leak he pin, in the ao of the glans, when he is not
" Guxrran Organs: Itching, or itching stitches in the glans.
Fine stiteh through the glans. Itching ret otha the glans.

—IM), Iteb leon the prepuce. stitebes in th
oe thors on the scrotum. Violent, cbt

Eiffusion of semen (by day) se affectionate caress.
Early in bed, feeling of weakness

he had had an effusion of semen the night before, while asleep,
which, however, was not the case. daa plied the
menses would make their appearanes. A girl of twenty years,
who had not had her courses for one yettr, but was of wise

healthy, bad an attack of ‘nausea in the pit of the stomach,
imine aftr taking the medicine ; this was followed by
a lump of passing the vaginn.

Corp Conyza : ng, violent coryza. Coryza,
in the evening, when going to bed ; catarrh on the chest, on
waking up. Hoarseness, early In the morning. (Sense as of



--- Page 83 ---
74 ARNICA MONTANA.

crackling in the trachea, when walking, and, in the eve-
ning, when lying down,)—315. Fetid breath from the mouth.
(Constant burning about the borders of the nostrils, with de-
sire to sneeze.) Sneezing. (a, 22 bh.) Freqent sneezing, (a.
48h.) Vapor, as of rotten substa: coming out of the mouth
ho altos hua Botan Sasol a vereesineereiien in te toon
he felt as if hi th ca an agrees n tra

as if the walls of the trachea were too thin. Feeling of ive |
coldness in the chest. Dry, short, and hacking cough, as from
a titillation in the trachea, every morning after rising, Entirely
dry cough produced by a titiltati ion in the lowest part of the
trachea, (a. 4. h.) (Cough with expectoration, which ap to
come out of the posterior nares, . *Cough produced by
titillation in the upper part of the larynx, during the siesta. (a.
4h.) Cough at night, during sleep, Even yawning excites
pine Cough is excited by cries, in children, when accompa-
* i ten . nation and a tabi Secreta a venth
and eig! ont.) * Cough, in children, produc ; ;
and lamentin +) 99 Pain in the bait it were raw, vith
roughness of the throat pens cough, fasting tee ee
exciting vomiting, roducing a fee

all wg Th sry bruise Con

gh with stitches in the side of
the chest. (a. 10 h.j—335, y expectoration from the

Cues :* Short, breath, Dyspnont, quick expirations
and inspirations. Agi and pains in the chest, * Oppres-
sion at the chest, with anguish, pains in the abdomen, and
headache.—340. * Excessive difficulty of breathing. Frequent
anil slow deep breathing, with pressure below the chest,
Aching in the lower extremity of the sternum, which is espe-
cially peti deep inspiration, (a. 12h.) Dull pressure
over the pit of the stomach, in the lower Fe "the sternum.
Stitching achingly in the chest.—345. Cat aching, with
pressing through both sides of the thoracic cavity, inereased by
Inspiration, (a, 1h.) * Dull stitches entering the thorncie
cavity through the sternum. (a, 2 ae in the left
side of the chest, like pricks of pins. (a, 29h.) Prickings in
the sides of the chest. (Quick, difficult i tions, slow ex-
pirations.)—350, * Stitching pain in one of the two sides of the
chest, pai aio p a short cough, which increases the pain,
and b nued asthma. * Stitches and prickings below the
last rib. Pain, like prickings, in the right side of the chest,
Violent stitches in the middle of the left breast, * Dull stitches
in the right side, near the ribs.—365. * Stitches in the lefi

breast, during a deep inspiration, near the sternum. Stitches


--- Page 84 ---
ae ee The beating of the heart is more like quiv¥-
Pain in the region of the heart, as if it were squeezed

Pro gdh ith rene 7 Ne The motion of the

ha i ey pl then suddenly ao Tee Pain as
in in the sccmpaned yng) ee

cic a in teee
ii se scan ie one win rsa vomit. (a. "2 h)

Early as “ay Tou of Hod apes to we nc-
uf in the: 3 afer e meat yt ayy
ling of coustric

walking,
ear ary standing.) (a, 2h.) Ahi im the
Corr aint ae

. ‘motion, or contact, ar br Red sweat on the
chest, peers Sere we Nive the ehest and in the
be removed bernie 7 nen some

minutes. ) Tingling itching in the lef side of chest. (a. 1

‘Back :—375, Pain in the os sacrum, as after a violent
thrust or fall. The small of the back is painful as if it had
rip inalpeaigl Pain in the smal) of the back as if somethi
Biter tae pet atin cpt aeeian cantar

in that co ng deeply, or
r as gan in the back and limbs. 5 ‘380. Pain i

as from bruises in the back. per ies F cmghac tag back, Beso
wal on tne ee eee ‘ 8 ie teks rb
under the shoulders, as if something a lump were lodged.
these which causes dull Sees eating m not when at
 Stiteh, at every inspiration, in the night side of the back,
from the last ribs, ribs, as high up as the axilla. (a. 48h.)
Sensation as ifthe spinal marrow were being poured into its ca-
nal witha syringe, with a feeling of concussion. —385. Tingling
in the leolumn. ‘Tingling in the dorsal spine, afte

in the false ribs as far the stomach. Painful pressure in the
middle of the dorsal spine, (whensitting.) ‘The dorsal spine is

ale


--- Page 85 ---
16 ARNICA MONTANA.

inful, as if it were not able to carry the body. Aching
Burweeh the scapulm. (a, 2 d.)—-390. Cutting aoe bencaee
the scapulm, extending into the thoracic cavity, when wi cing
(a. 6 hy Pricking itching on the seapula. (a, 2h.) Pain of
the right scapula, towards the back, ax after a violent »

or fall. When bending the head over, he feels a and
tension in the lowest cervical vertebra. Cramp-like pain in
the cervical vertebra, pret ial by dull sti from with-

out inwards, (a, 2 h. ramp-like tensive pain in the mes-
cles of the neck, when sneezing or yawning. Pimple on the
side of the neck, which when touoles is affected: wi a sting-

ing pain. (a. 48 h.)*
Sceerion Exraemrrizs : Diawing and aching in the left
shoulder, when standing straight. Broad sharp stitches below
the axilla, from without inwards Sense of excoriation be-
low the shoulder.—400, The arms feel weary,ts if he had
bern bruised oy ens: so that he was unable to bend his
ps 9 ie “Rea oa alias hone
ee of the arms, wing, cramp-like pain in the le

bones of the fingers and the fore-arm; it extends behind
from below upwards. Tingling in the arms. Painful con-
cussion or shock in the arm, almost as from an elec-
tric machine.—405, Painful stitches, like shocks, inthe upper
part of the upper arm. ‘Twitehes in the left upper ann,
as if a nerve were put upon the stretch. Wwitchings
in the muscles of the a arm, (immediately.) Dull
ees i aoc iontna of si upper arm, which cause him
to start. Intermittent, pair pressive tearing, extending
from the lower part of the left a arm as far as the elbow,
apparently in the bone—410. ‘Tingling in the forearms.
en bending the arm, the flexor muscles of the fore-arm
became sti; p sinagy muscles again is painful to
him. (a. 2h.) Sha stitches below the elbow-jaints,
(a. 2h.) Slow, dull stitches in the left fore-arm, with acute
ins, as if the arm were broken, (carly when in bed.) ‘T'ear-
ing pain in the arms and hands.—415. Burning stitches in the
‘forearm. Pain as froma sprain in the wrist-joint. Pain as
from a sprain in the left wrist-joint. (a, 2d.) Sharp stitches in
the wrist-joint, increased by motion. Ae fa Pam as from
a sprain in the wrist, (chest, back, hips.)—420. ‘Tearing pain
in the loft wrist-joint, especially when writing ; the pain is felt
in the dorsum of the hand ; it decreases when letting the hands
‘Nore: This kiad of pimple, surrounded with an inflamed red border,

is extrenjel to a boil Boils are, cured by Arnica,

b
Hommoput Arnics may be used as a ve agnitint bolle
sires gi are aubject to then, I know this from cxporteoe: "


--- Page 86 ---
“i pints ie aap somemeg itg cosa

finger ; ees, en gre igagthen ny a yr

fingers, (and in the knee.)
Niger fi itch stitches in the anterior
ge (a. + stitches in the tip of
the bend of the mid-

ae pani go Sy ra rig
on Exrremiries es. Tremiling inthe the lower ex-
Hick in the lower extremities, (Abscess of the
thrusts in the hi ‘Pain asfromasprain

k yb ler {Tearing
wes o ‘tng © lous eievennen ae pate

hip he Sieh, toh olgh hong exteadoke wien siting (a, & hs) Peis
i ex when sitting. (a.

e th Dye in cdi stepping upon theft Sues
of in the mae thigh —445, Continual
pinehing on the outer side of the thighs. af +h.) Pain in the
thighs, when walking, as froma blow or contusion, Drawing,
Cy Ang iy Plchivg in uergsanveca a toy left. oar when sit-
tit ih wader + be portion of

ea the oh s hos. in: tho kaon, (and. in

fingers.) 450. Fine stitches in the over the
hema ({a.+h,) Itching stitches on the inner side o ay?
over the knee ; Pe eer ae ee ee. a. 2 h.)
Sr agi of the inner side of the thigh, like
Sra tay valle wien Mane Sh) The tases

t vac w a.

suddenly, i when standing. (a. 1 h. Sometimes
sudden absence of power in the knees ; ser beet, whilst the
foot are namb and nsible. (Crany pain in the knee
and leg.) Arthritic pain in the a little fever towards
ev x mes painful. ier in Gea be
stairs, as if one had knocked it against
pales si h.}—460. Prick in the knee, when touched.
(a. Lh) Resting aching below the lf knee Pain as after a
Oe ne the calf of the right leg, accompanied by

2


--- Page 87 ---
78 ARNICA MONTANA,

lnssitude of the | T witching, laneinating pain in the tibia,
extending from opalw upwards. (a. 6h.) tacking in 3
paralyzed foot, Feeling as of tingling and creeping
the feet, Sudden swelling of the (sick) foot. Inexpressible
pitin in the (sick) foot, as from internal and as if
it were lying too hard; this uneasiness obliges one to move
the part hither and thither, in the evening. (a. Sh.) Tearing
pain, like boring and diguing, (this is the literal thes
corresponding expression in English is * grinding pain,

above downwards in the left calf; the pain then extends into
the thigh, thence crossing behind the os it te finally
terminating at the right iliac bone. (a. 6 bh.) nsion in the

below accom

gastrocnemii museles from u

traction when standing. (a. 7 hh.) 470, Aching in the ‘eines

after knocking it against something, only when walking,

cig Setise as of gurgling in the lower of the tibia,
below upwards, when at rest. (a. 4h.) Pain in the

tarsal joint, uanliatiag, tearing, (almost dull anectees Pain

iH

as from in the tarsal joint. ‘Tearing in th

Ht Reig th be Sth te to

in the tendo Achillis, only when extending the tral jou, tt
not when walking. (a.2h.) Stitches in the soles of the feet,
in one and the same spot when walking, os if there were a

corn. (a, 36h.) Tingling ings in the soles of the feet, ¢
one and the same —480. Violent burning in the
ing in the feet, Cramp in the toes of the left foot. (a. 36 bh,
Dull throbbing pain in one of the toes, Dull trembling pain in
one of the toes.—485. Violent Lassa in ae rsd when walk-
. Laneinating, t pain in the tip of the big toe;
po on gradtally, asd is felt when ving Soa Fe the
purpose of taking the siesta. Arthritie, dull pain towards
pei: ex from a sprain, in the joint of the big toe, accom-

by some redness. Single, severe In the big toe.

at hb.) Dull, long stitch in the right big toe—490. Single

shocks inthe big toe. Sweat of the soles of the feet and toes,

Painful cramp in the muscles of the soles of the feet. Lanci

ating tearing of the lower surfuce of the big toe, especially.

when vite | down the foot. (a. 4h.) Sense as of tingling in
hands and feet, and lancinating pains in divers joints,

Gexenat Symproms:—495. Deeply penetrating, dull stiteh-

es in the limbs, hereand there. *Sense asof pricking in the skin.

&

—

=

7


--- Page 88 ---
ARNICA MONTANA. 79

the skin of the body (Stinging, buming
skin, here and there, which is pene inae done

500. Sense of 5 Stinging cing aod thing pn he
Pees the siesta ; it goes off of itself and by:

muscles, almost in every of the body,

ane wi comes ani livin.

ber fap A Da of the Davee in Spa pena i The
crease blowing, movi and even e

sound, * crea time 00 tenes tie Seorope

of the bade ,
A gg en oa page
ei ‘the forthe ns fr pe po

| seutvenn all he ts of the skin, on making

the light maton (a, 4h.) * Painful and excessive sensi-

oe of the om sags — O15, pipers in all 3?
as

the joints, during motion,
the ini ay ls Fr ganas Sh.) Painful iP apace hw ws ie
when

ached olt the carringe in which i
n one treads too tf a upon the for foot per
on re alle sense as of tingling, or or dull pain in a
coutused eit a Handing peinin the mbs. Excessively violent
ae ie made the a dot ee with

like the ine omneree te more than

bruised, both when at rest and in motion, (a. 10h.) Faintish-
ness in the feet and arms, when walking in the open air. (a. 24h.)
se HELE Teen, Sakeeh aes tirwerodn sais

“ae of being bruised; oblige him to
lie down. *'Tremulous mneasiness and faintishness—525.
He feels faint when byron he recovers himself when

ge after having taken a walk
in the open ar; the Rees ents ae sees ot Uae eco weaty)

immediately, fl asleep and dreatned imme-
ately oe in the open air, he feels as if the



--- Page 89 ---
s0 ARNICA MONTANA.

whole right side, especially the shoulder, were too heavy and
yzed ; he does not foel this in the least when in the roonr,
ta. 8h.) Heaviness in all the limbs as after great 5
Vhen walking in the open air, sensation of heaviness and
pressure in the museles which cover the articulations of the
upper and lower extremities. (a. 8 h.}—530. Excessive heayi-
ness of the limbs. Heaviness of the limbs. Relaxation in the
limbs, as if they had been strained too much. Lassitude and
laziness of the whole body; the legs are searcely able to stand,
—535. General sinking of strength ; he can scarcely move
a limb,
Sizer: Yawning. (after+h,) A violent shivering thrills
through him when walking, Yawning and stretching, accom-
nied by dilatation of the pupils, without any sleepiness, (a. 1
.) Frequent yawning. . Frequent yawning, in the
evening, without any sleepiness. Bistpinene. (ae th.
the evening, one feels sleepy too soon, He becomes very sleep
after having walked long in the open air; he is not dis
em, either to speak or to think, althongh he was very cheer
ul previously, A good deal of sleep—5d5. Sleep full of
dreams. His sleep is fall of dreams and does not refresh him ;
pip pie ing nemye eit edn Anxious, heavy dreams
« whole night ; press his strength a good deal. Fear-
ful dreams of large black dogs and ets taeda
falling asleep in the evening, Hi “1 80)
loud while asleep; this wakes him up.—550, Starting
while asleep. Starting and jerking backwards of the he:
while . Lamenting when asleep, (a.2 h.) _ unin-
telligible talking when asleep, without being accompanied by

Rs

he dreams for several hours; the dreamer shows much irreso.

lution. In the evening she sleeps a couple of hours ; after-

wards she remains wide awake until 5 o’¢lock in the morning ;

then she falls into a sound sleep until 9 o'clock in the forenoon.

HG Inicleecpeanied Uy a Minute Git Miter chine
ht; this is accompanied by a stinging and biting itchin,

an erratic character —560, Sleepiness t a da (atk)

He becomes sleepy too onrly, in the e . Somnolence,
Sudden startings as with ight, when falling asleep, Anxious
dreams al i been seen in previous dreanis.


--- Page 90 ---
fi night Vivid dreams, the first }
ame was agreabe th ter pat part causing aasiety,. Vivid
nnot be recollected. Dreams peerage
Jal obj objects, of th Tepe Fen iecioge) vee
to
gti y large onl coped k

talks loud and is waked by it (6th da
by it: (6th ine a fallin

up, with, of samen (second. mah
of heat sn pi this allowed by sngush when awake;

a

gee eg roused from

He

pe op fit. (a 10h.) In the. cose atvons
a ) a.

in tas ths Guslioees boxes i Sor agg? rises and conthinnee this
whole forenoon. He ot alies - but he
sleeps so mec piers sg ng leopless-

ness with anguish, as if owi anil 2 or 9 oleck In



--- Page 91 ---
82 ARNICA MONTANA.

the whole body and the sopra the same time, heat in the
head and redness and heat in the face, accomy by
ness of the hands and a feeling as of the hips, back and the
anterior surface of the arms being oe deal of
thirst and drinking durin has yawning st at to fever;
—afterwards thirst, but ie dking rin the hot stage.
Shaking chills without any thi peated attack
of anguish with flying heat over the whole body. ‘Reanal and
eeas Ogun of interes fale ee panied
angu accom

by dizziness of the head; he acts tulctine’'ta the hes
body ; (he coughs for hours. until he vomits ; a 808. him
at night.) Heat of the whole body. Sweat. Slight
sweat when gris from . Frequent sweats, Attacks
of anguish. Violent attacks of anguish, Anxiety about the

a

ee
Sle a tee 620. sang Cer saind (wiibout th

a

being any anxiety); one feels as if one were prevented from

ny jones aren extremely yi ace nied

ea) Aas want of disposition for any ic _
every sort of work. Indifference to ¢

cessive inclination to gre oe = Ba ra her,

without possessing the
prgie ics injuring one’s gp “Bevesive sensitvencr
mind ; extreme disposition to ble as well as disa-

of the body. (On one occasion this excessive veness of
the mind was observed before that of tbo body; T ve also
she cally rc Ae there was no occasion for it; when
someth i od howng She told her, ne Soni rial


--- Page 92 ---
fanciful visions —639, He is contradictory ; nothit
done to suit him, (a. 3, 12h. Quarrelsomeness and peevish
ness. Peevishness; he would like to quarrel with every body.

Obstinate and resistance to other people's opinions.
a. 4h.) Sullen inso h.-
Oi Sree ag career Bc

Ansentc.—(Seo Chronic Diseases—Vol. IV.)
ASARUM EUROPAUM.

ihestpabien te tha eice of sted rom Satie) a

bande me! where me fie odinnsy physin ysicians have at-
virtues of the
eerecel nea cheesy tay tse ‘

the i oma te Pants ade (toy FS) ), pretend

wimeh sr
ph eat All they discovered Sip eee hipaa
this plan mn eine to doo ng
isentyspic cnc forty grain doses; of the re-
markable symptoms may be esl intionted Solos tony
potterhsegauias ee ae of vomiting, and with what
r symptoms accom This is not mentioned.
ity they ha on yi un eee
‘causing violent vomiting and cen, W
si at bg dig yop espe. ocepetonemt
was b a as su
root should act simi iy cca eee
remedial character consist in merel BEERS On Fe

ies of A: Me voting i be
n able to Siesta oon st



--- Page 93 ---
a4 ASARUM EVROPEUM,

violently expelled again by nature, such as Arsenic, the sulphate
of Fink the sekeate af C ‘Gohpern ¥ Veratrum album, ete. Do these
substances, all of which excite vomiting when taken in excess,
only exist for the purpose of being asemetics? What a
short-sighted and superficial notion this would be! I raise
this complaint not only agninst Coste and Willemet, >but
against all our so-called observers, who are in fact no observers
at all. Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. All they
a eee eee
evacua t r, rectum, ete. ;

rnily conte aonieeeioa f the : of disease, which hich ‘hey
equally @ conceptions 0 nature w

consider scoctiirig amiecel aateevaees out noe by
material agents,

By com the superiaiey relation which Coste and
Witlomet have jh di us of their experiment S de cation

which they do not seem to consider any ek uch as
man remained alive—with my own — of Rages we shal
fee] inclined to admit that a dose of Asarum

in a sufficient | pasty to produce vomiting—th pats
} wr par dar He ozs en dest od
the most Cangas id may even dest
indeed been seen by Wedel. What an es
menduble means of removing (i

ith ‘except the

of losing his life! Far be it from us to treat our suffer-
2 fellow-men with so much barba
elaey kind Preserver of life has created Azarom for a» much
she end. To curea vomiting, which is accom
oms similar to those of , this is the
ach is oe ich we ought to make of that root, precisely the
Fn ed en of the pewiiee seswets excite which it has

w wha gaa * rs
nefit of lables yes ack tical —o. “
Ee sad of subverting ee ibs he

the Gedpition which ass current vary the elegant
nme of hrsecures ‘

violent diseases by means of small pated drogs, which act
ot create an

ae oi Adige oe ae eee



--- Page 94 ---
>.
, ASARUM EVROP.EUM. 85
thie physicians do. If these Fore = peg rai
fe whi

it is becan: omer '

bene one gt ‘ver ar st substa
a tpg ppt, ew

a a employ ony ote
Sato fishes svn! hte

a sete inj an “antidote

Trinks : Avarum is especially suitab

peeenee e
nervous and after

ear seat ery with |

Pa


--- Page 95 ---
86 ASARUM EUROPEUM.
. *

OBSERVATIONS OF OTHERS.

Heap: Vertigo as from being si intoxicated, when
rising from one's sent and wlth i (in ten minutes.) He

does not perceive the objects which him = Condition
of the mind as if one were just wet falling basen Spe
engi Fe ideas, His thoughts are so overstrained that
they vanish from his perception —b. He feels Sie sepia tn
his head, and is not disposed to do an aay hing Tnabitity to do
any Kind of work whatsoever; he every tne an
awkward manner; his mental faculties fail hin, s to
every votes after the vomiting he feels somewhat relieved ;)
~ in general, his mental facuities are deficient pte the whole
time of proving. Sensation of vertigo as though he stood upon
ae gro (in the evening, a. 4 4.) , sort of

Saeed condition of the whole head, with tension in) the region

of the ears, Early in the moming, when oo a
7

aeons of the head, with
Sea ‘h.j—10. When he pire
r,to reflect for instance, then his t
Yariah, and he bas conet Gs nking. ofe riptl
to reflect, the pains in the head, and the nausea with inclina-
‘tion to vomit, increase perceptibly ; he has to abandon his
ideas, o. open Be OC sete eee ., since oth quite
stu ng pain in forehead, dreary
be ng = ent ety een wi tom sleep too
ear ull hea ie. {a+ Bei se
in ibs left temple, afterwards in eons the

bones, and lastly the ocolpat 8 of the head,
less preceptible when walking than when earl ; with pres-
sure in the as with a tare from within outwards,

especiall w the t eyelid.
and pont Matird en on tthe Hea toe * We

ia ful tightness
head, with Pathe tani yore.

which moves to the side of the head. (a.
path Sotbecd: tho igh tl
n volnaiber ae the ears,
more Saar iol what walking or shaking the head, lens so when

sitting. (a. 12h.) P over the of the
from without inwards, (a. 24h.) Prosmunt te a a


--- Page 96 ---
ee

. ASARUM EUROPAUM, 81
pees of the forepart of the head from downwards, as if
y a stone, (a+ b.)\—25. Violen in the forehead,

rire)


--- Page 97 ---
a8 ASARUM EUROPEUM,

fooring in the left car, bling the distant roaring of the
wind ; © ehrill sin i (gin) i ) in the right ear, Staining
sensation in both external and internal ear. Pressure
behind and below the left ear—60. When bending the head
towards the left side, he feels a pain as if a bundle of muscular
fibres had been displaced i in nence of ome violent exer-
tion; the pain extends over the left and bebind the
ear towards the left shoulder, i increasing and pb syn-
chronously with the maf th conte pain acing Sane sth exsive
tension in the region of the orifice ment a itorius.

ion in the side, as if
the ca of the a sitter
Dimin hearing of the ait it it geal oh with
the hand ; one feels as if the w pie 3 Be dcp
one another, or as if the ears were up with cotton. He

rom is stretched across the right meatus audito-

. Sensation as of the, outer meatus.

itorius being ete than usual. Both of his ears feel
bay ta toe. He hears worse with the git than. ha
ih i a. en bee He i pe eden fp ec
orifice ¢
were bein compres at ih) Sona as —-
were aro = aercss the an orifice of nah me
us, Lensive re in the pomiay: tind
Con days ; Dian during cold )
sensation of ee ie Sepia na ek
almost always remains the
the left lower jaw, accom ota i when sit error

increased secretion of saliva the right pri oe
saliva imparting a cold fasting, a+ nS + aes
Piaget Burning, stingin v of the left check. Warm

in the lefi chia adh rm feeling in th cheeks,
(a. (10%) When washing tb foe with cold water, the vertigo, .
headache, he panine or the kere of the eet en meta, in th
mouth, contraction of muuseles, and the tein
ness in the knees disappeared, but all those sy ine iaw red

when Bvigd / sit ei a owl eh, acon
ractive pain of the accom
by soft pushes as with a pointed: instrument, an —
pains in the third molar tooth
om Dischar of bloody mucus sf the note’ ;
ouTH AND : Dryness of the inner side of the
lower lip. Cold feeling ‘ag il the upper and anterior teeth, as if

‘When blown into the nose.
.



--- Page 98 ---
in the throat, w he is unable to
ce One the cervi-

> Hl site
ot coma. 1 snes

seats with stinging, Ra a

. he er awn
i" me for a whole hour

und reyes haeartoy Iniperfect
‘part |

ng Nausea, (one hour.) General
ee nausea, Nausea and loathing, with shud-
i Na nausea and inclination to

ith rie Ht ie.
ye symp pes
heb Se


--- Page 99 ---
90 ASARUM EUROPAUM.

the effort at vomitin oo breath, and almost
suffocates him ; sees ek ng but a quantity of ponte
water is thrown up. (a, 24h.) ge with exertion of the
stomach and violent compression in the strium, a similar
recent ees. in the head. (a. 24h.) Nausea in the sto-
mach, with disinclination to attend to business, laziness, and a
sensation as if he were without a head.—120, ae is
followed by a diminution of the pains in the pont
Sromacn: Fulness in the stomach, with hunger,
ing in the stomach. 2 at ath. 2 Mies. Sight pinching the the stonach
or close above it.
point.—125, Tiublowese + pressure on the othe ph of ine shoe
which makes him unable to decide whether he is hungry or
no, the whole day. Hard pressure on the region and pit of
the stomach, two days in succession. Pressure on the region
of the stomach, duri we an inspiration.
_ Anpomen: Constrictive pons in the region of the

;
ad m. Occnsional st in diferent parts of the

ej foro, abating a
—130, * Cutting in the ¢ noma en) ‘ones
colic and vomiti Fu n the abdomen, with appetite
and hunger, | sulshoeds ia "he be gr vamp oon

some fot eae motion.
biiensn Cutting in = sc haetbonpe sharp sti
rectum from above downwards previous to stool, (early in the

te oe nice te aie a

stool, he another eutti

the abdomen and rectum been’ und nee

sofier than the former. Stool, ng

The usual morning-stool delayed for 1 c

pe (hss elo, mou) ae ot inet
of tous og song for six

cll with ascarides.
Uninany Organs :—145, Pressure i the bladder,

during and after the emission of urine. Constant desire to

urinate, Raging inienm pelnin the se gpoto; dapting through



--- Page 100 ---
ASAROM EUROPAUM. 1
tractive, violent pain in the same, for a io ng time.
Genvrat Ongans; Miscarriage, abortio 2

caused by the

ain, as from a contusion or a
ihe ‘sight scapula, expecially
7.


--- Page 101 ---
92 ASARUM EUROPAUM.

when touching the scapula, or in moving it from without
inwards. (a. 25h

"Neck: Pain in the left side of the od oan as ifa
bundle of muscular fibres had been ponaupiay & violent exer-
tions; the pain afterwards eat over the head and the
shoulders, (n. 6 h.) Paralytic pain in one of the muscles of
the nape of the neck, as if the Ito were bruised when aplog
them, Sensation in the muscles “ts the yea a of the a ur

eget Ms pail eee Baie
pressed by a cravat,— contmction of the
Percal tanaciae accom oe a visible he flexion of or ane head
towards the lefi side. Violently tearing stitches in both shoul-
ders, both when in motion and at rest. Ad, pov

Surniiox Serecesreets 2 Sudien dull pain in the axilla,
apparently in the axillary glands, Pressure in the left axilla,
as with a rough piece of root Itching, as if caused by a
flen-bite, at a place below the mea
as from a sprain in the sh when ‘the arm,
Contractive, tensive pain of the “ike Heid, tale,» wi mys:
the hand upon the: or when Jeani ytic
weakness in the arm, He is. unable to let his arm lie upon
the table without, feeling onesieet 7 he feels no pain when
the arm hangs down. ‘Tearing ache in the left arm, in what-
tifa Sen dw Drawing paral in the
MG seen wing and irning pain, extend-
ing from the the thumb and the index-
finger. (a. 3h.) Gann Baia ance pains in the
upper and lower lim

Iron Eesuneany Bruised feeling, and imes

painful tearing in the upper and lower lim Pain-

fu teolitain in iit hip. gree Dull pressure in the right hip,
Drawing and tensive pain in the heed of the Jeft femur and
farther on in the bone, especially when patton Drawing
ache in the hips, (when walking» Dull Dull pain in the bip-joint,
and in the m tile of the think when touchi Aid eesti
oan Be fom the pian aaakaee Bitte
sex sation from the right t to asifthe
limb would ap When treading, he he feels a.
violent the ie ‘int, and in the middle of the thigh ;
the foot feels para its he cannot step on the foot wall,
Sudden, riding pain in the upper muscles of the left thigh,
Lancinating tearing pain in the left thigh. Spasmodie con-

.



--- Page 102 ---
ASARUM EUROPEUM. 93
traction of the muscles of the right | near the knee, abat-
ing when extonding the limb. hos ‘ g lancinations in
the vivo ani Be motion pe ate at

ee de in pearogen
tude in t
ioe raya Ph pos Mas pe 4
wih ie (al ho rcs Se weariness
nd knees, with racypsstndr iad were bruised,
eginnis intermittent fever. * Un-
ntact rege) move about.

fom aS

sin the left tibia.
ag sage Be both ete i tee if iNity of were Kips
nerves: when mere] Bsn (whieh he 1 cna

obliged to do) that some one might seratch evens}
linen, or a similar substance, with the tips or the the

ing « focu:k an Laziness, slowness, and want of
‘ie nieve ama : mh,
ruised allover, Li hos of al the nbs he he
air the Fesdene disanpoerod Mher with the x ele in
sels; the drox si humor. He imagines he i
hovering in the air, when walking, like » spirit,
Weise: San re wni im fs a evening he

hat he fe
“ asif he would die
£0 to hac

ee an Shaking over Ss whole bay folaneae
udderi the body rh.) Shud-
pi ih gusta : ir Dae aay ‘Slight chills

in a feet (s ly brought on Sy titing upon a hard crust.)


--- Page 103 ---
a4 ASARUM EUROP.AUM.

Chilliness, and slight and ee chills, without any thirst—
235. Uninterrupted: chill chilliness, goose-skin; hands and face
are cold, blueness of the face. ‘The hands are ‘iey-cold,
the arms and the rest of the body are warm, still they are
covered with goose-skin, and he fas violent chills. Shaking
chills in the evening, with extreme fain especially
the knees and the small of the back, without any thirst ; i

hands are cold, the rest of the body »-ysagg Aaba the

covered, he feels Prides Beste the eyes, a pres-
plight pep Ape gs ecto ay i
times external heat ; but when ever so little exercise in

takin exercise,
without 4 pi any thirst; when walking fast in the open, or

rally warm, feels even a little hot,
240, Chilliness when d Cold feeling over the body,
Se ee cas t, police irae
cold to the touch, with goose-skin, the warmth returning in a
few hours, and being somewhat ‘increased (in sy Sawa
with a slimy mouth, dryness in the throat and thirst ;
wards another attack of coldness as before, and in the bevel
an hour previous to going to sleep, an increase of warmth, ton-
tinuing while in bed ; he is: obliged jo uncover his hands, with
Cyne the palate. Fever the yeh f ehilliness
in the afternoon, abating ae os in the open
air, nor by external warmth ing stall with
internal chills and thirst, poet Meal ch when not

fooling, the heat of the head and face re-
fonint Is chilly at the yah n.—245. Heat of
ope Sone and the hairy es the body being na-
Saar dices ansl Chukar cto ae cotiad eee
ng at eat

after the chills, especially in the face and the px banana

the symptoms in the ear a arm feoli
censat well break out. (a, 4h, Pelion vere Sond

body, the vor day, (a. 24h.) ‘Slight sweat Sealy? on the
upper part of the body, and on the upper timbs.—250), Profuse


--- Page 104 ---
night-sweat. Warm swea wh sitting ‘still. He sweats
i seve from a sigue, we
RAL Syaproms : Weeping, sadness, and anixious feel-

Great cheerfult h.) sometimes
fore few momanis by a molancho ie ate ages mood, —
| BELLADONNA.—(Atropa Belladonna,

iewhdh eal pars faint) eens ot Fe and mix

sequal parts of aleobol.)

Tas fant be grown in upon rather ¢
scllrities should also be Pemedcinal viz
tlre “are not inferior to those of

have, from mere
s of Bel-

tuted in frgpate They know not that no remed gan be
ce ag Age a tims to

How ies do tot the ble acute cate of quinsy espocially
when thar i external swelling of the neck, become fatal in

lobch . blisters, gargles, i _ refrigerants, Pienrane te
net ona gy Re ear agragat

Eos hates health si tons oF 8 Nenisaibeas ie a few hours
by means of one sin f Belladonna !

ery eli, een the Pearl errge dangerous, injuri-
even pernicious, in the f the and th
quasi rag ve powerful Sou teen 2 Seaiesiee sient

‘Nore of ram Transcator.—Hahnemann by the term
a marley thowe remedia! agents that toa great number
aod will fe prove curative in avast number


--- Page 105 ---
96 BELLADONNA,

when it is used in an improper manner, or exhibited in
portionate doses, On the other hand, the most cst
most energetic remedial agents become mild and eminently
enrative, even in highly Bes pap ie systems, When they are
exhibited in small doses, and in diseases to which those agents
correspond in sym sb peer Belladonna being a powerful ery
the greatest care should be taken to employ it with i,
to its homeeopathiec character. ‘The common odes one
sole art co in applying to a given sigs
those prescriptions which he had Jea ped BY
irae 9 of the paramount importance of pecee ides cea
goin especially remedies of great power, with the most
ae eee for their adaptation to disease,
experience which [have had occasion to ‘gather at the
Seaeile of is catutrs focahe late p80 co tak years, has
duced me to use the decillionth degree of potency ape
pathic treatment. The smallest portion of a drop! of that
potency, is sufficient to exhibit that degree of curative action
which the case nd eee
‘To obtain the hundredth ie Fe mix two drops
of aleghol with equal Bar the juice the  plant—this
method ought to be pu eal ached all other medicinal
and then mix this TW sdeety-nine ain Yanitiok ree
of alcohol, by means of two strokes with the arm
above downwards; by mixing, in the fame n way, one drop
of this dilution with one hundred Minding ol, Biv
obtain the ten thonsandth degree o tel dp
ing a drop of this last dilution with toe nh hund aid She
of coke you obtain the millionth Naan dare tie
a thirty i or othe thet ied throug

ane

SO?

thirty vials up to the t solution, ‘Ths ie
egree should always be used for
If "OTE Belladonna be homeopathically i one one globule
of the thirtieth dilution is capt to exhibit with grea

the curative action of Belladonna, ey alg gr

F
2
ie
5
z
i
Z
4


--- Page 106 ---
RELLADONNA. ot

_ Almost all authors ha commended vinegar as an anti-
dote against Balladonna. “This is a mere psiozsias) which
one author hes eopied from the other, Abundant

pide ym contrary, that vinegar increases the pain

produced by

Pits of sis and colic, produced by Belladonna, may
be. by 0, , alth it palliati
Maca love ch Orie srobattn ts loves the stnolenee

consequent upon enue
8 insanity, and b Balsa
tupor, i aly tle ionay, prota Aw five

| vot eras The i i sie
tion of poor fel og toiares easphae pr ia as well as

_ Adequate help is ost necessary, when. a uan-
tty of tho bert of Bollatonan has been swal Ballad sa

boolean iy oer yy

ular fi
the tetani¢ convulsio
jatve™an secrete vorng of the tens his i may
Fora samt Paige aa be ee

‘whieh is proper to , and they wer Seanipe enough

© mistake for — ag the purple-rash, which mga
a into ea oa from Be ever since the Sih 1
They falsely a "9: to purple-rash the term *searlet
- fever,” and faile a cure it by means of
sient hse abel Cane yearns, 90. ns to bg og it

ingupportable ; the seer reer


--- Page 107 ---
98 BELLADONNA,
the remedy which I had proposed. I rejoice that, in subse-
nent years, other inns should have again observed
Sana scarlet Seat that they should have confirmed
ylactic virtues of Belladonna agninst this disease, a

should have done me justice, after the unjast derision which
had so long suffered. ’
Purple-rash (Reodvonk) being no disease different from
scarlet fever, ek oa to be treated in a differont way, In
purple-rash Belladonna can do no good, and patients who are
treated with Belladonna in this di will generally have to
die ; whereas all of them might have been saved by the alter-
nate me. of re sge and ad omnia Peds ja, the for-
me ven against t eat, the increasing uneasiness,
and the a Sipe anguish; the latter against the excessive
in and weeping mood, Aconite and Coffea should be alter-
paieny greta every itege fergie or twenty-four hours, in
proportion as one or the other medicine is indicated: Of the
Aconite I give a small portion of a drop of the decilliouth seln-
tion; of the Coffea I exhibit the millionth eer of poteney in
the same form and quantity. Reeently, diseases, which
are so different from cach other, the Sydenhamian scarlet fever,
and the purple-rash, seem to have become complicated in. some
epidemic diseases, sothat one patient derives more benefit from

Aconite, another from Belladonna. b

-

NOACK AND TRINKS ON BELLADONNA,

Belladonna produces phenomena similar to those of Aco-
nite, not directly, however, but by exciting the central points
the nervous system into a more expansive activity, which,
ry & process of reaction, produces phenomena of inflamma-
tion in the peripheral tissues. Belladonna ix especially anit-
able to ric, scrofulous, irritable individuals, persons that
are disposed to affections of the head and brain, congestion,
spasins,—in whom the nervous aystem ix highly susceptible
of tmpressions, an ae circulatory nen Ae any excited ;
yg ¢ temperament, to the orzanism |
theca the female, ane me 9 x are yao
ogous to thoxe organisms, onna ix therefore expeciall
poten! Si ane di,

GA grag vex of women and children, and all
cases in which (he whole nervous system is in. a state of

ee

‘Norz: See Thomass 1a Thueesink, Roodvonk, =
tracted from his Geneeskundige Waarneningen sinh


--- Page 108 ---
i

a

erethism. What Aconite is to inflammato nes to

Sanat Wescetna excited in the arterial ; thir, 4
Bikes corre emo noe: ‘netion.

au Avouite, the vite t
ertheiecacton eattae cular
Lf y bea a paamegie cay eee
} Bosorsenes the more delicate the Seibel een or or tissue,
a8 an Organ ‘of sensation, the more suitable is  Beliadonn
pease rhe et seni errdueir asd el terna-
m with merenry. pregnant women, especiall
when combined with moral symptoms, toothache, gastrul Nyreeralgh
fear, fri Catarrhal ections. sleds bbe. upon
‘ear, right, chagrin. ons. Spasms of every
j mapoce tearm aida obey vine :
es, blond delicate skin, plethoric coustituti
‘oa sinter swellings, or to pleginonous ot
mmations ; spasrns consequent upon the
Bein Lares and Opium ; hee wa
vu c hen conseqnent 0 an effu-
vascular system ; rai, ad anturne ; ee
cae pulcaunarmers spasmodic constrictions 2 rap
cles; hysteric convulsions; trismus, tetanus.—Ep ba =
alternation with Calcarea) ; ‘epi with ipaniey Vitus's
'Stramon Cal

dance (in alternation wit um of Calearea).—Cata-
lepsy.— Er gotism.— Tarantiam.— Hydrophobia.—-Plethora
cvera.—-Congestions to the head, eipoirse | the eyes, the chest,
uterus, and the hemorrhoidal vessels ; covges-

tions to the , With sopor and in cholera morbus,
hen the, | has cats Aconite and Mereury
may be used here.) Prodromi lectici ; apo

as winea Paralysis tein ceee benno
upon the abuse of Cinchona; rheumatic and tic eondi-
tions, with nine eee # owe and swelling of the affected
sive erratic 7. (Belladonna is said to be
powerless won age na.) Obstruction and suppuration
of the Gates Sere phulosis and rhachitis ; secrophulosis

7 Seraph ma tein the adr peor of Liinasdunpenie of the glands;
pont te peng ir the periosteum and the

‘ scrofulous children ; scrofu-

pes brsvheet ep cers.—Scirrhus and carcinoma,
Measles, when combined with great intolerance of
light, inflammatory action of the brain, diphteritis, or when


--- Page 109 ---
100 BELLADONNA.

there is vomiting after suppression of the measles,—
alba et rubra; miliaria herpetica ; dropsy, with fever. _
quent upon suppression of (in conjunction with ite)
psendo-erysipelas, phiegmonous erysipelas with lustre i
throbbing of the affected parts: erystpelas laeve, fugas et x
bullosum ; erysipelas of the head with delirium ; érysipelas
of the face, with ideable feverish irritation, and gastrico-
bilious symptoms; erysipelas neonatorum; erysipelas in
typhus; erysipelatous inflammations of the skin consequent
upon stings of insects.— Impetigo ery > eres er te
tina laevigata et miliaris, especially with su hydro-
cephalus, Bioko ie on the parotid glands; or frig a
ness, convulsions vomiting consequent upon suppression
the eruption of scarlatina.— Vepiala empesiall we when headache
threatens und the fever of suppuration is violent; varioloid,
when the joints and the mucous membrane of the trachea are
affected; varicella, inlly coniformis, or when a violent,
general erythema sets in simultaneously.— Metastases of acute
exanthemata to the membranes of the brain. — ——-Pem-
phigus—Acne.— Eczema mercuriale, with feverish, violent
irritation; porrigo larvalis, especially in children of a ple-
thoric t, with inflammation of the of ay and parotitis.—
Panaritium.—Ailments of frozen limbs.—Malign carbuncle-—
Decubitus and gangrene.—Slerplessness consequent upon an-
Boren uneasiness, in plethoric habits, with congestions to the
ad or the thorncie viseera ; or consequent upon a morbid irri-
tation of the brain atid nervous system, in fever patients and
persons who are fond of spirituous drinks, who suffer with weak-
ness of the digestive organs, abdominal plethora, infaretus,
worms, in hypochondrines, hysteric individuals in general, in
patients affected with spasms, scurvy, chlorosis; sleeplessness
asa symptom of internal inflammations, organic diseases of
the chest and abdomen, or as a prectirsor of delirium, of local
inflammations, or the evolution of a nervous, typhous state,
Letharg: Kay icant under the following ps: When
combined with redness of the face, yp rarer veins of
the neck, heat, accelerated pulse, or injuries of the head,
inflammations of the brain, pheumonia, in pulmonary
patients (as foe soa of arachnitis lenta), at the beginnin
Serer suis ors shar pa alegeeplonerrot
fever, intermittent fevers, after partakin jously of spirit
drinks, in'searlet fever, small-pox, erie a eeallerihe
eruption of small-pox in full-grown he after a speedy
suppression of cutaneous eruptions or old ulcers, in attacks of
the gout in old men, pregnant wemen,at the termination of



--- Page 110 ---
BELLADONNA, 101

Ly Ate sms.—Kevers, where the symptoms indicate a
ore oO marked inflammatory action of the
oo 5 ‘i 8, + in i ‘ is j ha
 synochal fevers, with nervous, gastric, and r rater

i ploms, or with a disposition ta the putrid»
* rheumatica et catarrhalis ; nervous fevers, wi oe

iency of and simultaneous irritation of the nerves, or
with burning heat, Wolfsohn several times prevented the
setting in of the typhoid symptoms in the precurso

means of Belladonna (also by Acouite, Nux. rc Beyenie}
Febris puerperalis, with predominaut cerebral symptoms, mania,
paraphrer wild detiria, local inflammations of the perito-
neum and the abdominal organs; febris puerperalis, conse-
quent upon mental emotions, or upon suppression of the lochia
or the milk (previousty Aconite being used).—Febris lactea.—
penetensesye ea being relapses conseqnent upon a yidlent
of the type by Cinchona (Arnica, etc, may also be
d here).—Febres lenta.— Derangements of the mind; weak-
ness of the memory ; hallucinations of the senses ; exaltations
oe oe th ecstasis begat plex, paran wy canine iets
paranoia simplex, para ; Moria (especially man
and morosis nawesilns muriin eestation, ecnoica, ¢ sal-

~p s; depression of spirits; melancholia
ja; anoia simplex, melancholia, catholica; abu-
erangemunts of the soul > cestasis melancholica ;
olin moria, mania furens, meluncholia mixta catho-

lies, loathing of life; parandia anoa; abulia, paranoia anoma-
la maniac Vertigo, consequent upon an irritated, excited
rebral. action, especially in beginning of fevers, or when
oms of exhaustion set in as precursors of an approaching
; stage, or when there is feverish excitement consequent
resseil bleeding at the nose or upon an imprudent
of a ctitaneous eruption, in the beginning of the small-
speed Snoypraat that a state of sopor will set in at the next

attack of the fever), in hysteric persons (as precursor of the
a arOx ys ™m), in parturient women (ns pre-
cursor of eclampsia or apoplexy), in children and old people—

Headache consequent upon too great a congestion of the blood

to the head, especially whon consequent upon catarrh ; bh
with totterin Tok tia tad. ox wid teeenblites or quiserion move-

(in alternation with Sulphur) ; convulsive tre-


--- Page 111 ---
RELLADONNA.
102 a

mor of the head ; megrim.—Violent neuralgia of the
conjunction with Hyosciamus and Ignatia).—Cerebral i
of women, owing to a nervous excitement of the sexual orga
paraphrenitis metastatica—Inflammation of the brain «
of its membranes (after the fever shall have been s
subdued by Aconite); threatening dropsy of the brain, .
cephalus acutus in the first stage ; meningitis ; :
encephalitis vera, insolationis and potaterum Nee riun
fremens).—Spasm of the eyelids and the globe of the eye —
Infllammations of the eye,of a serofulous, arthritic, cata
rheumatic, and even traumatic nature; serofulous rst
tions of the eye, with violent photophobia, swelling of the eye-
lids, and ulcers upon the cornea (ihe photophobia being re-
moved, give Sulphur, or, if Belladonna and Sulphur should not
prove curative, exhibit Calcarea c. or Ars, or Rhus), arthritic
pains in the eye, remaining after the eyeball had become de-
rs be in arthritic Sipe ae PE SHS the eye.—
Slight obscuration of the cornea ; spots and ulcers of the cornea ;
staphyloma (in conjunction with Car iar OF medul-
larixoculi ; contraction and distortion of the pupil.—Iritis.—
Retinitis —Optica) illusions and visions:—Seotopsin; chroma-
topsia, photopsia ; hemeralopia gravidarum ; paropsis inver-
tens (secing things upside down) ; strabismus ; pd srt poly~
opin; amblyopia amaurotica, even when resulting from too
great an offort of the sight, and aymaurosis,—Pain in the ear—
Otitis interna and externa—Hardness of hearing, even after a
cold.—Phlegmonous inflammation af the nose-—Ozana-—
era at the nose, especially in childhood, or which returns
habitually or by the slightest causes, in inflammatory diseases,
expeciely when the bleeding takes place from the nostril of that
side which is not inflamed ; fevers, where only a few drops of
blood flow out at the nose, in persons affected with jaundice, —
Parotitis (in conjunciice with M )—Pras maleic ner-
vose (in conjunction with Sulphur and Phosphorus) —Swollir
and ulcers of the lips ; scirrhous. induration of the lips,—Dif-
ficult dentition of children, with cevebral irritation and violent
congestion of the blood ; toothache in women, especially preg-
nant women ; inflammatory or congestive toothache.—Stut-
tering, especially in fevers.—Glossitis, also when produced by
h Ptyalism cone ee or when accompa
nied by ‘violent congestions to the head, head attacks of

vertiza, being precursors of apoplexy, by chronic hydrocephalus
(in young and old age), by eruptive fevers, intermittent fevers,
spasm © Pogelsth. § an irritated state of the sexual organs,

by nervous affections, by quinsy, or in hysteric and hypochon-


--- Page 112 ---
BELLADONNA. 103

7 dea 7
(in ies ion with Salph, Blog Sia Are)
eatarrhalis ving first Acouite,

cs nea
eee = fs conpeeaioae
i the brain, spinal mar-

throat and chest,—

yr Regie i ysl cet

ult feet ae and penton
the limbs.—Pyrosis roxis potatorusm:— rc a especially when
pes ay i a TRAP mI =p pa ternal,
indicating the reception into the system of soemeions
iene: also during and afier acute nis po ee © Sup

pression of sarap eruptions, quickly cured old ulcers, sup-
pressed | ration, in arthritic metastases, in lying-in woe,

) and it Pe seen emesis, especially when

originating in menostasio (alternating Belladonna

Nix. vy, and oo chronic, in cliloralic
say tara 5 iver, or in) Raman wo-

. y afer cold ; purely se up pi eake on
one sw te ferences comteicuse agus caest
w s on i

Sponk Soa Ratan even

wih vomiting, cons upon cold,—Hamorrhoidal

peo ga ‘ab pains in the small of the back, and pree-

sure ‘towards the chest,—Hwmorr Ixia, —Fis-

sures of the ike ineat ise Cui epari ae
(Byeesiamneme bee }—Colica nephritica.—

ort i —aflamnations of the urinary apart, particularly

er ihetatie and spermatic cords, especially when the inflam-

mation is ot an er spelcions character gee from

peeccr an of the bladder, inflammatory
of the bladder. ly sr ially when there are
infaretus of the liver or spleen, complaints, vio-



--- Page 113 ---
lent colic. intestinal hernim, inflamumatory and spasr
tations of the urinary organs, consequent wo
managed theumatisms and devoting the beginning of | Li~
eal dropsies of the brain, in drunkards, pregnant women, inter-
mittent fever patients, ashing to the eruption of approaching.
scarlatina, in leucorrhaa.— Violent desire to urinate in fevers,
with scanty emission of urine or none at all AS cine a
proaching convulsions and deliria)—Wettin:
dren, during sleep, especially scrotulous Step culGdaenss-heketee
—Metritis, metro-oraritis and nopharitis. et (pre
Aconite).— Intumescentia uteri benigna.—Prolapsus uteri
Scirrhus et carcinoma uteri.—Feverish hysterism tent
upon interruption of the catumenia.—Dysmenorh -
strual spasms shortly before the period, with sewing. a sopor
like pains from the small of the back as far as the thighs and
calves, or extending towards the navel, and pressure to to the
— Too profuse menses, with draw wry pelos
the genital organs profuse metrorrhagia, with labor-like pains
in the small of the back (in i agar with Platina and
Arnica); hemorrhage from the uterus, with considerable excite-
ment of the vascular. systetn, with fr i of bright-red blood,
and cutting, squeezing pains in the abdomen.—Abortus, con-
sequent upon violent congestion of blood to the uterus; bad
cousequences of abortus.—Bad consequences of weaning ;

*
a.

mastodynia nervosa ; toe reel heal serait ee
upen — mastitis nnn); et Cg
odcatinas Scirrhus and carcinoma of t the eta

abba of the thyroid body.—Laryngismus stridulus.—
Aphonia, especially after fight, aie the sudden suppression
bleeding at the nose, during violent spasmodic fits, or when
accompanying cerebral affections in fever sree ll when there
is violent headache, inflammation of the lungs, in sal fou
patients, t women, after Abele Py or after
pain ; pohertn daterrhalicy catarrhal inflammations: hi the
air-passages,— Grippe, especially when the: becorne
delirious as soon as they close their eyes, and the look is
rami —Bronchial affection in typhus fevers, rs ema
the expectorated pier roca Sep utinous, viscid,
8

ial haw ke up, up ineried with “aorta blood, and the
ms ooping con, and duri the
Seated st cies aa e cough; dry cone :
with habite ions to the chest, and pledhncio ‘babies

nighlly attacks of dry cough, witha constant irritation a
tickling in the larynx, forcing one constantly to cough, so that
the pationt cannot breathe and the face becomes blue-red,— .


--- Page 114 ---
mm of the chest-—Asthma th —Asthma
ticum, hystericum, conzesticum ; avt. ma Mir; athe
natic complaints after smoking putts lc ;, espe-
ly when pet St A ca gi upon a disturbance of the the menstrual
.—Preumonia, especially when nervous,

or cena atthe of epidemic scarlatina; hil
ng of pneumonia is characterized by congestion of

bleed to” the aed talking in sleep, considerable vascular

erethism (in this reap Belladonna tay be alternated with
Aconite); in the stage of sup ive infiltration (here next to

ee may ns a “e . Tart, Stib. reaper bie 2
or ‘Lachesis ected pneumonia, with rie in
cma h troubl ae Coplodaexpectoration and at

esome,
weakness (here may also be given Ars. Phosp. Lycop.) ;
donna may also be exhibited in pneumonim, the symptoms Oe
which do not heper to Aconite or Sik however, it ought
then to be ranked aft os aera Palpitation of the ays
vith intermitting ura ge —Rheumatic stiffness of
inp eck Reena com HI ® ‘he sspemrry marrow.— peli
the of the hack and —Psoitis.—Ischias.—Coxalgia ;
“sespnborce qari a ieeeces ing.—Phlegmasia alba do-
etna see ina the pant in ee
ladonna, i
. RC, ),

pi KDrEs: LA ners Cham,
Chin. Cina. Cotf, Coloe. Con. Cupr. Dig. Dule. opted ee
08% Mere. Nitr. ae, Op. Pi ac. Plumb.

oe Sulp. Valer- . Alum. Ammon, Arn.

A. Clem, Perr. rap. Hydro, ac. Lauroe.

aio Nicot. Nux. v. Phosph, Plat, Rut, Sabin.

‘Stan. Zine.—3. Croo. Ign. - M. austr, Magn. mur, Natr.

your. Petrol. Sabai. Samb, 5s erat. Verbase—Belladonna
is most suitable after Acon, ee tack onic. ac. ete,

Heap; * Vertigo. Object ecm to him to be balancing to

andfro, * His head turns; hive ot attended with nausea, such

as pe fa upon turning Kkly round ina circle, or such

bc waking the morming sleep, after a

Sis ocak taiieslcy * Sense as of turning in the head ; a

oa of ri is experienced in the pit of the

stomach ; ie ne symptom becomes so excessive,

while walking, that was unable to distinguish any thing ;

every thing vanished from before her sight.5. Vertigo, as

ee ia ching turned round in a circle (after the lero of

orig ks round in acircle, Sense of dullness, and

as” NA in the head ; she feels relieved in the open air;



--- Page 115 ---
106 BELLADONNA, bt

the symptoms become ravated in the room afer oh
quarter a an ety Fits Roraei both when at = “a
motion. * While sitting, sense as of weling in the
resembling vertigo—tO, Vertigo, and tremor of the h
the persons were unable to perform any kind of oe -
a Bb Yo: walking, pl igi on to pe hada com:
aint pressive anguish a often
. without ene like an intoxicated ee She rises from bed
early, and totters to.and fro as if she were intoxicated. * Stagger-
ing, arising from giddiness. Fits of vertigo attended with
obtusion of the mind ; these symptoms last a few minutes
twelve honrs)—15. The whole day his senses are con
used; he knows not what he does. O| nof the mind.
Obnubilation of the head, with ular swellings in the nape
of the neck ne six hours). itoxication. Sense of i Se
cation i iately after dinner,—20. Intoxication after
ing ever so little Bier: Obnubilation of the head, and into
tion, as from drinking wine, with a bloated, red countenance.
His whole head feels confased and dreary fora number of mane
creamesons. _ ns ripe Seat
re head, a8 though a pressing moving
to and fro, especially below the frontal bone,—25.. Obnubi
of the head, as from drinking much brandy, and ain
much tobacco. Obnubilation and obtusion the ‘ns
such as are experienced ina state of incipient intox jeation.
*Obtusion of the head, increasing during motion. “Reluctance
to all sorts of sa lnbor. Lassitu of both the mind and
the body,—30, Mental wenkness, faction. Coufu.
sion of the mind. Confusion of the mind; he knows not
whether he is dreaming or waking. Coufusion of the. Senses ;
We feels sleepy and. is nevertheless awake ; while in that state
lted butd tusled fa bri ‘ ite tiful ieee
pen e acy Sys mitt u
before her mind as Sy Babs “He imagi ie ghosts
and various kinds of insects, veg siden ep ape wo to be
transparent. ‘He imagines he sees things which are not
present.—40. It seoms iherasil « epeene the left side of
the head were transparent and brown. Tes he is
riding upon an ox. * He does not ppb own relatives,
Absence of consciousness ; he was sitting as ina dream. * Loss
of consciousness. —45, Ho often lay without his senses, without
consciousness. * Loss of senses, and spasms in the arm at .
night, * Highestdegree peer Loss of the senses. * Loss
of sense, with convulsions o extremities, —50, C ‘omplete
loss of sense; she is not conscious of herself. intone


--- Page 116 ---
ace perbo * Loss of intollection, for some weeks.
parm Stupidity.—55. She has a during
she (ah her Wes ; she forgets that which she thought
af ile while aga wo a to recollect it. Absence of
nd; he easily does his business and forgets things
ric he had just intended to do. at times this, at
times that idea; he was notable to think of any thing ee
larly, ond he immediately things which he had pase
Fie eat aes oF abit ich he had just been g-
Diminis ear ry feeble memory ; he forgets what
Sietussbehed eile the oe of an eye; and cannot
recolloet any thing.—60. Return of the lost memory. He
remembers things which had taken place a long time ago, He
remembers things which took place three years ago. Vivid
porn i (curative afleet,) (after twenty-four hours or
hea 65. Headache, as if the brain were stunned. Hi
whole head feels heavy as from intoxication. Sense of weight
in the upper part of the forehead. which causes ve
lnces a by of intoxication Rieter fortnight). head
heavy as if he were te he is not disposed
todo any His hea only above neve ty
hate cea weightin Sachact ons is
serie with ae ese ae vial Sr
Ream t with v in the who cee:
iver a ois eet of the head as th
were about to fall haat “tay them ee shay heada
if something were descending ies aha
pre nestra by ‘sag the opeoe of og en i. perwenieed
ee: we! feet Achi se Dae sense of Bint? she from the
‘hain owas

Sau ene: Lona eh with var

teary i ntl right vertex ; after-
wards this exter is anaes in the leftand then again in
the right vertex.—75. * Head expecially in the forchead
(after two days). ye dull heicashe ia one ofthe sides
of the head ( five and twenty-four hours), Sense as of

pei in the head, especially in the lower part of the forehead,
hoon rein aad nose; this aching becomes insufferable on
setting the foot down for the nani of standing or walking.
Headache above the orbits, as cei the brain were pressed
yee smaller space; this pain obliges him to close his eyes.
aides tos right aot eminence, which soon extends

pas th ee forehead (after ten minutes)—S0, Violent
pressure under the right froutaleminence. ‘The aching below

per ht frontal eminence decreases at intervals, but then
Fico ye Samar sere Aching under the frontal


--- Page 117 ---
108 BELLADONNA,

i early in the morning, shonly after having waked,
up, upon sine from bed. Violent ing in the left frontal
eminence, pressing from within outwards. Violent aching in
the left temple, pressing from without inwards; by | r
this side of the head upon the hand, the aching is felt in the -
whole anterior half of the briin (after three quarters of an
hour).—85. Violent aching from within outwards in the whole
loft half of the brain, a oop! violent in the forehead (after
two hours and a quarter). Aching in the region of the right
temple; when wanton e head upon the hand, the pain
increases as ifthe head would fly to pieces, and extends as far
as the right frontal eminence (after eight hours), Erratic
pressure wn the head, and always extending over large sur-
faces, “Aching in the forehead ; during motion it increased
so much that it caused his eyes to close (the German text
is, that it drew his eyelids together) ; Sh headache became
milder when he was seated ; he was obliged to lie down;
then the headache disappeared ; upon rising, it re-appeared at
once and Jasted for two days; neither eating nor chinkin
made it worse during that period ; as soon as he walks in
the open ‘air, the forehead feels pressed upon as though
should be crushed ; ia bine ome if it came from a heavy
stone resting upon the forehead ; on the third day the hea
ache disuppeared entirely while he was sitting in his room,
Aching, deep in the brain, which is felt over the whole head,
both when walking, and after having walked in the babes
—0. Headache in the foreheatl pressing like a stone; the pain —
is relieved by resting the head upon something, and bending it
over: md “ip is ap ico with a Hie the pupils, and
a whin peevish mood ueed by Somat causes
(after three hours). ‘Tension and pressure in the righ
side of the forehead. Tension and pressure in the le
verter, and in the forehead (after twenty-four hours),
Hedtiache, as though the head were made smaller from
side to side, by both sides being screwed . *Con-
tinuous and foreible dilatation of the whole ‘brain.—
95, Violent pressing in the whole head from within out-
wards; as ls it should be dashed to pieces (afier three
hours). * ache Close above the orbits, in the forehead, as
though the brain were pressed out; the temain forcibly
closed on accouttt of the pain, the pu hg contracted to
the highest degree, and the voice being scarcely audible ; the
person has to lie down (after 5 to 24 hours), When stooping,

the person feels a pain as though e thing would press
at the forehead, Sensation 3 if the ren were paaaiing


--- Page 118 ---
BELLADONNA, 109
pine i upon bending the this
off. (after one hone aid sane Wh bai
© sensation as ifthe head were
aia, increases considerably ier 3 pate and ya balb,
00. In the open air, the sensation as if the head would burst
became very violent; he dares not pestis because he
Jest this should increase the eae a4.) Throbbing pre
ing in the left side of the « t. (a,5h.) An aching ie
eee frequently obliges him to stand still when walking
at every step the brain | Ss as if it ascended and descon
sb the forehead ; the jain decreased by strongl rongrly cin
e parts (a. ec Violent ptstions in in the foreh
wa ate were being raised. Pulsations in the
nd nino pra body, when waking up—105,
Violent throbbing in the brain rom before backwards and
prompt wager pce -vapoteare this throbbing terminates in
nful stitches. Aching, with o sense ns of
igo cg fhe Ha se ®, in the upper part of the head,
rama eet ( oh) tt hing
2 | t hollo a. tehi
. cin ie nao erg onwards tia 4 nus. Cattng

a wh were

with ‘ head, especialy
the frontal and fatescat eon th ein a is wanderi ily
cri ache in the eh te and vertex ; the pain
spreads in different oe ‘Rendin ache in the head,
“erratic. (a. 6h.) Drawing ache. raction in 94 head
tending towards the forehead, as if the teits would dilate.
pain extending from the hen over the right
sgl 5. Traction downwards, ‘right aide of th the right
orbit. Boring and throbbin ae in the righ of tia teat @
‘shuailer pain existing Sead ; the Dison boats at
motion. Boring a Pa aching the head, in different pla-
ces, by day ; this pain becomes stinging inthe evening. Boring
“pain in the rightfrontal eminence, ees in the morning, i shart
» after waking up, Continually at
ache, as if something were rocki e ithe hed, impei the the
sensation of jerks.—120, Jerking
sic a violent when aalting oe u > anit fast, and
which, Whenever the foot is set wal dating en (eas
sensation in the occiput, as if a load
h.) The wee ee he ha ated wih a stit a
especially the Dull stitehes in the left temple from


--- Page 119 ---
110 RELLADONNA,

within. Slightly nets ache in the whole forehead. (a. |
h.} *Sharp stitehes through both frontal eminences
within outwards, (a, 2 et Excessive headache ; dull
stitches dart thro Hats in in all directions, sar
stiching ache in the righ a.quarter of an hour. Mees
h.) A few dull beat in the the ip of thegecipnt, V
cutting in the right frontal eminence, more violent wien, cp
ing, less when touching the parts (a. 5 minutes.) ror

as with a -ougupreas eos knite, dart through i pi

eveuing.—130. * Stabbing, as with a knife, from one temple

the other. A few lancinations traverse the | iin 8 eee

ately behind the ear, as fast as lightning ; they almost

him scream, in the evening. (a,6d,) * as wit :

double-edged knife, in the right side of the head ; afer ire

e ist : be the — bes ene then leeds pint

: © 0ce so that preven on
site, "Three iisat MAG through ihe rn the

Serilicad to des occiput ; weal Sone pnt

appears. (a. 34h.) Lancinations, with rending in ri er

over the right orbit.—135_ Cristo teat tearing pain in the

moving from one place to ain and

in Aa bi frontal ‘praiiienee, (a. 4 h)} R pain in the

cae side of the vertex ; it is 7 Mawes Reis Seeeiy
earing in the forehead, externally.

—140, * Tearing over the i vis baer rane

ache in the forehead. (a. 8b.) Headache on the top of the

head, a kind of turning, at times also grinding, at times tear-

ing ; ‘the pain became much tore violent by external pressure ;
it seemed! to her as if her skall were quite thin and could be:

pressed through. Sense of cold in the brain, j in the ae a of

the * Traction it the forehead.—145. Dra

in the frontal bore and in the nape of the nec i when op

eke’ in motion, Headache; the sutures of the skull feel

as if they were being torn asunder ; seb capelr ded

lever were applied for the purpose

Sensation as of swashing in Ae Bs at When stoping, fea

the blood rushes to the foreliead. * When stooping,
rushes to the head ; the head feels heavy Pima
who eoodinae ad to the wiitcn any internal heat;
nding the head ae it seems to him as if t

bair, Gnawi “headache, exverned zon the frontal ¢


--- Page 120 ---
aris ei headache on the left side ott sw ettpital
se a oe per e rtor
Quick! pain on the right sido of | Saeed
apie. Caples he font emi at ne eg

ee aan Sethe om: aby el is s0 no
longer coo t pain-
tosh even the pressure hale gives her pain. Uneasy

Face 170. Distmeted ea * Paleness of the face. -
Paleness of the face with thirst. lieeee of the face with an
inerenved appetite, Sudden of the fice, for some
prepa a extreme ee ie of the face is inetantane.

he face, with cold cheeks and hot
Soteake nga hes heat in the face, without ee pg ext
redness. (4. 8h.) Sober burning heat in the whole face,
without redness of the ks, and without any thirst, with a
moderately warm body and cold fort, (a, 4h.) * Sensation of
nei the ey Sone behind big? th es + 2) :
over a. * Uncom-
the face. dg mange Aes ng wer tin the

i Sean (e. dhordoe) Rs ht with
teataltion *Glowing redness of face, with
inexpesibe heal headache. * Heat and redness only about,

the hed. 185 cea toca iy (Coie np Congestion of blood

to the head ; red cheeks. * t heat and redness of the cheeks.

* The face face is very much swollen and hot, * Redness and beat

in the w as if he hod drunk much wine.—190. Heat in
the face day, as if wine h caused the blood to rush

- tothe head, (a, 12h.) * Dark-red Tidckoning of the skin
in se Henacoe seat expo Spi? . * Bluish-red face,

. ee ential redness of

face and chest 195, * Scarlet redness of the
Sp keen

he fa
yh ne wit tines Wee


--- Page 121 ---
e :
112 BELLADONNA.

oy ae shivering, va cloudiness of the head and face,
red eyes, and swelling of the face, which is covered, lyon
the t orchead, with stall, dark-red spots of various sizes. 4
on er wakieg up, a staal] blue-red spot on the left cheek, w
increases gradually, until the blue-red swelling occupies the
whole cheek, with by and stitehing in the eer which is
red, and boring and throbbing in the w Ee cheek ; the pain
greatly increases by motion ; iN a ey te s the pi cheek

‘swelled, and the swelling lasted nys, Red, swollen
face.—200, Red and swollen face wi san eyes. ' Swollen
face, ‘The face was red and swollen, the rest of the

* Swelling in the checks with a sarhlinRaainn ‘
Epi of in the face near tho nose and eye, with watag
lands, which lasted five days.—206, Swelling
te Itch ae eae which comes on wird

», increases the ig ind ailected wi

heat, a: lasts - dof het ‘< i ea Swelling of in

VES + soenidal wieler dé the sis ids. Continual
trembling and Tamas of the icons ai ag it lasts the
whole day, 0 Bie es are
wide open, owing pee bone
bing pain in the hee towards the i an er cats
wet where the pain is, is ral seat

lachrymation, for half an oil (a, py h.)

become watery. Heaviness in the eyes, re upper

id. mane nei in the morning, her vice aeeta,
Lecter she or able to keep them open ail oem
yk of bee —215, * Iiching stitches in the inner canthi, which

oo ile or ‘e while by rubbing. (a. 1h.) *'The inner
ca mee is very painful, oe Liege slightly
touched. * Smarting both eyes. * Involuntary yen 2a
ie *Saltish water continually mms out of lis

rymation. ir ink in elon: nose, mouth
tog of bu ess in
beara ai Deo 7h i
Increased heat and

been surrounded with
oe nat
cornea, with a titillating sensation,



--- Page 122 ---
-

8; ne « tiva is tro rod veins, W
pit in ie x aya ti (Chin ene. Brose
singing inwards. Yellow dia while OF fs he. eyes

* Early in the morning, the e: are completely nely eae
Swelling and 3 gow inflammation
pra hagree ' first burning, howerbe ng zoe
ache for three vckig (as 4 Taye: * General pressure in
pg es, as if hard ae eee Wheae
eyes, she feels an achi oe the eyeball. A ki
ressure as froma fog, is f right orbit; it then is
nthe ithe fo d, thea again in the orbit. * Pressure in the eyes
with lachrymution, especially early in the
ling and og of theayest t they felt as if
of sand ; she bed torub them. (a. 1 h.)—240, * Pressure
as if sand had got in, (a.2+h,) Pressure in esate
a ‘grain of sand. Pain in ahe orbits; in eyes sometimes

foal as if piney were being 5
ie fea re ea 8 more ae

: | peo dee ad in by anothe Ease ng

rehoad downwards upor » Tearing in clerie
wich extends from, the ~piotheed i, Drawing pain under
the left eye, upwards. —245. * The t are contracted 5 it is
epioaily 4 di mace te — them. ¢ papils are ‘eontracted
the who! etsy : do not dilate evening, Contraction

of the pr 2 a Os Ww Sen ones oth 14+ h.)
Contre on, a, 24 ie \s com-
monced to dilate in Fa baltan hour; the dilatation raha little
by little. * Dilatation of the pupils after 34h. Dilatation of
pupils in the evening, even when the light is held quite

near, (a. 12h.) * Dilatation of the pupils. (a. 14, 16 bh.)
The dilatation of the pupila continnes to increase afier

pity Si ig ante “ < Psi phage Nigepe iat

5. Awhite lit ule in the

which is to oxtrome! dilated. Bixtreme aiarhtine of
the pupils, owing to the application of a recent loaf of the plant
to an ulcer below a iaenle * The a of vision is at

Ponca “ig

Entire dila-

eo

:


--- Page 123 ---
¥
4

© Amaurosis for three days, he cannot read any thing printed.
On waking up, he is bl The eyes are blinded and remain
open.—270. * Excessive ness of sight. Transitory blind-
ness with headache. * Dimness of ‘sight alternating with
cramps of the hands and feet; obnubilation of the head, and
faintishness of the limbs. Dimness of sigh ness of the
mouth, and pen in the belly. Dullness of sight for
hours—275. Dullness of sight with trembling of all the lin
Presbyopia, such as exists in old age. He sees nothing
tinetly, exeept remote o and parallel rays, for instance
star in the heavens; owing to the juice of Belladonna hav
got into the eye. Presbyopia asin old, ; he was only able to
ng Es Fog before the eyes ; blindness,—280. *Obscu-
of sight, as if fog were before the eyes, When reading, he
distinguishes nothing except the white margin which sur-
rounds letters ; these seem to have taken the shape of black
ings. Sensation as if he were not able to see any thing ; he
Bens Lor Deeds ark choner tua ga gadis
the letters look bla d appear blue and gold-colored.
* The eyes see a large ring around the fehttat een colors,
a 15 bh . When laying her upon her swo
check, she sees flames betont her atid the air looks to
her like fog. She sees a white star at the eeiling of her room,
of the size of a plate ; white silvery little clouds seem to pass
by it from the left to the right; this re ge is seen several
times and in different places; large bright sparks before the
eyes. He sees sparks before the eyes. When moving the
eyelids, he sees sparks, like electric sparks.—290, * One tees
things double. * He sees nothing, near him, things at a dix-
tance he sees double, He sees things multiplied and dark,
*He sees things wrong side up. *'The eyes feel as if they
gearren o294 The eyes protrude with dilated pupils. (a.
h.) * Staring cyes. Staring look. The eyes are staring
and sparkling. Shining, glistening eyes —300, * Shining, glist-
ening eyes, with entirely dilated pupils. (a. 20 h.) _* The eyes
are red, glistening, and turn in their sockets. * The eyeballs
turn canvulsively in a circle. * The eyes become distorted.



--- Page 124 ---
right jaw
shape of twitehings..

rminates ina sort of ¢

ternal meatus auditorius, as if some one were pressing upon it,
—325. e Goel in the right pa gga ts

ng
pin ny torn out of the head, Vain in the ears and temples,
which is alternately tearing from within outwards, and -
ing from without inwards ; this pain alternates with a Hl aes :
paths in the orbits, Painful straming in the left oar. (a. 5 |
Sharp thrusts, with clawing, in the internal ear, like a paint
niyo, Sep pain, near the right ear.—330, Pressure and
tearing behind the fight ear, (a. ih.) The muscles behind
a ear ore painful, the pain extending as far as the neck ;
muscles feel as if violent pressure were made upon them,
the frontal muscle feels the sume. A stitch darts from the ear
as fay as the chin. (a. Lh.) Sitches in the external ear, with
hardness of hearing of that car. * Stitches in the internal ear,
ocenrring during ations tasting of the ingesta. (a. 12h.)
—335. Dawine pain from the ears as far as the nape of the

neck. Violent on the



--- Page 125 ---
iz

Pm *
Ms
te P - eiieipon
‘ © rashes ont at the ears, Fluttering and a sort of bubbling noiee
Fi the forepart of the earsy— SAD, eafness as if a ekin had
en drawn over the ears, * Hard he

nore, painfal n touched, as fiom subcutanecns ulee-
ration. (a. 16d.) Pimples on the cheeks and nove, become

‘ Nose: A le of small red blotches near the reot of the
. bat ol
quickly filled tk eee nd covered with a crust, Coll nose,
t

—850. “Smell befor ose, ois of rotten | for a quarter

of an hour. (a. 4h.) Aching in the nasal Pain as

Sm from bruises in the nose, above the wing, when touching the
- parts externally, The senre of smell is too sensitive; the
> ! tobaceo-smoke and soot is intolerable to him. (a. 1b.)

* Bleeding at the nove, immediately.—365, Bleeding at the

nose, during the night. Bleeding at the carly in the
morning. Painful heving across the left halt of he nos
*'Pingling in the tip of the nose, going off by fiction,
stitehes in the tip of the nose, the whale night; best ining
the evening —360. *Sndden redness of the tip of the
with a burning sensation. ‘The left nostril is very painful,
becomes cloved by ulceration early in the morning. =
weeks.) Fine stitches under the nose. (a. halfan hour.) Vie
olent swelling of the rlip; it feels terse when opening
the mouth, * Painful nlcerated condition of the nostrils on the
side where they become united lay the upper a
* Ulerrated state of the nostrily and the rae of the lips;
but they neither itch nor pain. ;

Jaws anv Teern: Dinwing in the upper lip, with sub-
sequent red swelling of the same. Ulcer on the lip, which
bursts open. Painless pimple below the left wing of the nose,
with a white tip. Uleerated corners of the mouth, near
commissure, with uneommonly vimieh round about,
even when left untouched or unmo a, 5 h.)—870. Sore
feeling in the corners of the mouth, as if they would become
ulcerated. he 6,7, d.) Small pimples, one of them being on
the upper li near the tight wing of the nose, covered with a
seurf, another below the border of the lower lip, and a third on
the inner skin of the lower lip, all of them smarting as if they
had heen touched by saltish water, Small, ee
near the corners of the mouth, without any sensation ; they
soon pass off without suppurating. Pimple on the upper lip,
tingling when not touched ; contnet excites a stinging iching
init, Ulcer with a red edge, and corrosive ici Sasi cor
ners of the mouth.—375. The lower and external rofthe
lips is affected with a burning pain, and covered: with small
vesicles. (a. 24h.) ‘The lips, and especially the upper lip, be-



--- Page 126 ---
with bea

and oa
movemouts of

this i goes off iy sertcing
hing sensation scrate
mall pi on the Lg Le rs
the chin, resembling spr i sah ein
34.) Sharp siliches fiytha ch = - =
iy m3 nea eae in th shin, * Lock
ity u the jaws, on account of a a
. of the. Na age of mastication, (by esis OS thse.
She clased her teeth so firmly that they could not even be
opened when using great force, accompanied by convulsions
in all the limbs, and chilliness. She closed her tooth vg rine
that one had to break out « tooth, in order to poursome -
down her throat, —395, Stitches and tusion of ae ~ '
in the direction of the ear, She feels as if her lower Je
were drawn in; she expericnces t pain whea drawing
it forwards, and excessive pain when biting, Red wale
al the corner of, the lower jaw, cp unless of itsotf ;
touching it, one expencnces ye: ul stitches iu it, A
Sharp stitches on the lower border of the right lower as
bare at bubbl jo nf ra a) pan of i ig jaw
an ry ring drawiny the lower jaw
(in the glands Vis pale ey reg © jaw from “ae
ey went er sry “ae g of the cervical
ufal at night; ro peer during degtutition, |
oe of the cervical glands, Cramp-like, tensive
the left cervical mnseles, even in rest. (a. 8 quarter
ee ae The hiead is drawn backwards, burying of the
o the pillow.—405, Stiff neck, she is unable to lay .
her head on ae side. Sd neck, “Drawing in the ery:
muscles. achiog in the yight cervical museles,
Frise ihe ag hotest nine atecarag ay
sorry by external pressure. (a, half

re
Ha


--- Page 127 ---
¢

tehes in the nape of

1. E Mag tible throbbing of the ‘Seer Aching of the
a os week, close to the i 3. ‘not influenced by motion,
a

bra, when

3 i Violent, frequently reeu
neck, in the n of the second
ising the head, (s. three quarters of anh.) Vio-
the teeth—415. * Grinding of the teeth with

third cervical verte-

lent grinding 6

much foam at the mouth, sme! like rotten eggs. Grind-
ing of the teeth, and spn of the right arm. Grinding of the

teeth with copious saliva running from the mouth. *Violentl
painful swelling of the right side of the gums, with fever ar
sensation of chilliness. Vesicles on the gums below one of the
fore-teeth, painful like burns.—420. Ulcerative pain of the
ms when touched. Heat in the gums; itehing and be yr
ing in the gums. Extremely troublesome itching of the
gums, with pains in the throat. The gnims of a hollow tooth
are bleeding, {a 6d.) The hollow teeth bleed when puiling
atthem witht
the anterior molar teeth of the right side of the upper jaw, re-
maining unchanged in whatsoever condition the part be placed,
‘Tearing pain in the lower hollow tooth, and the sound molar
tooth by the side of it ; the pain becomes excessive, when the
tooth is in contact either with air or food. (a, 4d.) ‘Toothache,
mther dmwing than lancinating. Toothache, with drawing
in the ear. * He wakes up after midnight, with a violent tenr-
ing in the teeth, 430, Uniform, simple toothache, resembling
a sore pain, brought om by the contact of the open air. (a. a
quarter of anh.) ‘The toothache does not come on during the
meal, but several minutes after the meal ; it increases and de-
creases gradually ; does not come on after drinking, ‘Tooth-
ache, in the evening after lying down, and when yi in
some kind of intellectual activity ; a still pain in the dental
nerve, almost resenibling a sore pain, or a cobtinuous lan-
cinotion in severe cases. ‘Toothache; sharp drawing fiom
the car down into the hollow teeth of the upper jaw; in
the téeth the pain became boring, less when eating, increasing
after the meal, never ceasing entirely by day, but worst a
night, and hindering sleep ; (after drinking the pain be-
came jerking and boring.) Dull drawing in the upper and
right row of teeth, the whale night ; the pain hindered sleep;
the affected spot was somewhat swollen, (painfully. burr )
and hot to the touch ; painful jorks were occasionally felt in
the teeth—135, ge rp in one of the upper, hollow
molares, lasting the whole day ; from pain he sleeps only a
little during isis ; afterwards the cheeks become swelled,
* [Grinding (searching) toothache, (lasting only a short while,)}

e tongue, without any pain.—425. Dmwingin —

—


--- Page 128 ---
and dryness in the anterior h
the tongue is painful, .
tongue, white-coated, * with pi
the middle of the white-coated ‘to a ifth
cle, ese) phi Eien ct begs brite Po ada

upon it, painfully burn hen touched,

rhe pa Ins are beight-red, pride pee peal ir
pot (a... d.). * Tremor of the tongue. Stuttering of tee
‘tongue. “Stammer ing weakness of the organ of speech, “spose

unimpaired consciousness and dilatation of of tha repitet "(a 2,
3b.) He stammers like a man intoxicated ne apho-
nin. * Paralytic weakness of the organs of speech. era
Jessness ; rsdoeinn hearers aoe = Sos Dumbness. * Heavy
ws tae vy breathing and great lassitude, consequent
eondinon of the chest. He has grat id

culty a ing; his voice is sibilant. Low speech,

headache, as if the brain were being pressed out, close es
the orbits, in the forehead ; the pain hinders the opening the
eyes, and obliges one to lie down, with great contraction of the
tie * The tongue is covered with a quantity of yellowish-
white, Aga se mucus.—460, ‘Tenacious mucus in the mouth.
of tenaciéus saliva hangs out at the mouth.
 proftte ism. Ptyalism. * Soreness of the pease ost
i corroded. 465.

‘He frequen
of ne ed the rete hes the morning after
ene

somewhat of a pias saliva in bis throat
thickened, tenacious, white aid ‘sticking to the tongue like
yaa ‘this obliged her to moisten her mouth continually, * Sti-
my y month, with a sensation as if a bad smell came from his
mouth, as is the case when the stomach is spaited. “Tho mouth
is full of mnous, early in the Sees ie & he has to wash it from
time to time 7 the mucus passes off ra meal—470. “Slim
. early in the morning: when waking up, with
ache, both aymplams lasting bua short while. kan
Bs worning, when waking up, he has a very bad smell
is mouth. * Great feeling of dryness in the i lly with sel


--- Page 129 ---
t *
%

120 RELLADONNA.

table mood; nevertheless both the mouth and tongue look
moist. Feeling of great dryness in the month ; there was v
Tittle tough mneus on the tongue, and the lips were hot
peeled off. Tough mucus in the mouth with a feeling of dry-
hess.—475. * D ‘in the mouth. Busing of great dry-
ness in a ingist mouth, the mouth being viscid ; accomp 1
with a good deal of thirst. Considerable dryness in the
throat, * Dryness in the mouth with thirst, * Parched con-
dition of the month, as if the skin had been aa
something acrid or corrosive, — in the mouth, which
can scarcely be relioved, Dryness tn the throat. * Excessively
dry feeling in the mouth ; nevertheless the tougue was \-
nually moist. Excessive dryness of the mouth, which con-
stricted his throat. Great dryness in the mouth constricted his
throat and fauces; there was no mucus; moderate thirst; he
was able to swallow milk.—485. Dryness in the mouth, the
fauces and nose. He is*unable to swallow from drynessio the
mouth, the fances and the nose. Hemorrhage from the
mouth.! * Hamorrhage from the mouth and nose.

Timoar : Roughness (scraping) of the throat, when the
throat is at rest.—190, Rawness and soreness of the palate, espe-
cially painful when touching it with the tongue or when chew-
ing, as if the parts were excoriated, lasting several days, (a. 6
d.) Pain iv the throat. Fine tearing in the inner surface of
the angle of the left lower jaw, in the left tonsil and behind i
tnaltered by contmet, more vidlent during deglutition. (a, 2-4)
Dryness in the fances and barning on the tongue, * Buming
sensation inthe fiucks, * Violent burning in the throat, the
mouth being natarlly mojst; the Loni is not relieved by
drinking, but by sugar, however for a few moments only.
Long-continued, burning pain inthe fances; food/and be
cause a burning sensation in the mouth, like spirits of wine.
* Indammation of the throat and fances. Continual desire to
swallow ; he'felt as though he would stiffveate when not swal-
lowing. *Sore throat ; stitches inthe fauces, and pain as from
an internal swelling ; they are feltonly when swallowing and
when turnitig the neck, or when touching its side, but neither
when at rest, hor when talking. —500_ Internal swelling of
the thront. Soreness of the throat when swallowing or spit-

' Norn: This hemerthage ended in denth. Bven aller death, tlood
flows from the nowt, mouth and enrs of those who have i ‘rh
¥ ithe:

Billadouna ; they asaume a blackish violent tinge either «

or one vide af the body, or ower the whole body, at clan they are caver
with it ean spots; the cuticle coon prele aff, the abdomen herones
diatended, and sometimes putrefaction acts in in twelve. (Bb,
Gmelin and Faber.) .


--- Page 130 ---
> -

less inmbility to swallow. Impsded degtutition. * ,
able constriction of the fauces, png but foquntly

pe ts oc of destin. hs spon aways erat

lowed by a painful sera at ps pighetis, as if
hess parts were raw srg ‘oat sl or nm excites:
scraping sensation-in the Hise rongett it become,
sor by st Sei eae Sore sastin me pat a
ntition, (a.
Muetes y ga pa phir Sauces ; when
a a aot of | by utition, a iension and ene
ough deglutition ix not prose, Sh
ne th thaw act of tntieioer iiself the pain does nat ii
sensation ax of the fances being contracted is of itselfa
painful one. (a.60h.) * When swallowing, ane experiences a
sensation in the throat as though the parts were foo narrow,
contracted, ay if nothing would go down. (a. 2h.) ‘They
were unable to swallow solid foud. He chews his food with-
ott being able to swallow it, because his throat felt.as if it were
contracted.—520, During her loss of consciousness she fre-
quently thrusts her finger into her throat, stretches her gums
ee persons "ha roa with both hands, He has the grent-
est trouble in swallowing water, and can only get down ie /
little of it, Aversion toevery kind of liquid; she demeaus he
poor Bi when Tay Pouting drinks down hor throat
to swallow.—525, Paralytic weuk-
ness of the inner skeaae the mouth. Pressure iu the throat
with , tixing from the abdomen, unaccompanied by
eier nausea or vomiting,
te ath. rock pe “ lrg PE ys ic ue
mo s t
ee yak Spoiled taste of the saliva.
oPauid ip the mouth, posi ving eaten sometti
Putrid taste in the month, as 0 meat, two hours net
eating. (a. ri * A putrid taste rises from the fancex,
while cating or drinking, although both food and drink have


--- Page 131 ---
@ watural taste.—535. Flat sweetish taste in the mouth, Vis
¢id taste in the mouth, Saltish, sourish taste in the moutl
Salt taste of the food, as if thing were too salt. (a. 25h.)
In the beginning of the meal the aliments tasted naturally,
all of a sudden they cither tasted too'salt, or wero tasteless
had a fiat taste, with sensation in the pit of the neele as if:
would throw her food up again—40, Bread tastes and smells
sour to him. Bread tastes sour to hers Bread tastes sour
to him. * Aversion to milk, whereas she was very fond of
it formerly ; now the smell of milk is eoeeniog and repulsive
to her ; it has moreover a bitterish, so taste, which disap.
when drinking « little more of the milk. In she ave
ing bread and butter taste very sour to him, at least the last
mouthfuls; this was generally followed by some hearthurr
which continued two hours, (eight evenings in succession,
—hi5. (Bitter taste of the bread and apples, in the evening.)
Cofloe ix offensive to her, Aversion to camphor, One feels
an appetite, but has no desire for any one kind of food.
* Aversion to food. —550, * Total aversion to all of nou-
rishiment and drinks, with frequent weak pulse, * Complete
lows of appetite. Want of appetite with headache. Dimi-
nished appetite ; meats especially are repulsive to him. Re-
pugnanee to beer. —555, Repuguance to acid things. * Long-
lasting aversion to food. No appetite; every thing wus.
some to him. (He has a desire for this or the other thing; but
when eating it, he does not relish it.) He loses his appetite
after smoking. —560, Loss of appetite with a fecling of empti-
ness and hunger; when beginning to eat, he eats with his usual
appetite. Increased appetite, (curative effect.) Appetite for
vegelable soup, and bread and butter, for nothing else.
Gastric Symrroms: A liar contmetive sensation
in the stomach after eating a litte. Congh and great thirst
after a meal.—565. Feeling of intoxication immediately after a
meal, (a6 hours and a half) Violent pinching below the
urnbiticus after a meal, directly behind the abdominal integn-
ments. (a. 2 ho anda half.) Internal beat after taking beer.
auc of Sibi se of ge! , <cirynad driuks,
without caring about drinking ; he a whe cup toh
lips and then set it down fr Hance (a. 8 h.) A n-
ishing thirst in the evening with watery taste; nevertheless,
every kind of beverage is disgusting to her. * Great thirst for
cold drinks, without amy heat. (a 7 h.) Violent thirst at din-
ner, (ret ming for several days atthe same hour.) Krue
tasting of the ingesta.—575, Bitter ernctations tasting of the
ingesta. * Frequent eructations from the stomach, Sk



--- Page 132 ---
—* -~

the fauces, and mostly about the
upper : rynx, (a. 2h.) Accamulation of water,
in the mouth, in the evening, for balf an hour,—SS85,. * Nausea
and inclination to vomit in the throat (notin the pit of the
Pim oceaxional bitter eructations, in the evening.
Q ess after breakfast, * Frequent attacks of nausea
the forenoon. (a. 72h.) Inelination to vomit, when walk
in the 1 ay * Nausea in the stomach.— Natisea wi
inelitiation to vomit, expecially when he is about to eat some-
thi Frequent nausea and retching. Nansea, inclination to
vo and such a vehement thirst, that wore obliged to
dri excessive quantity of water. Vomiting, in the
eveningth * Vomiting, versie ree flushes of heat—595. Vom-
iting and profuse sweat. Excessive vomiting. Vout’ of
mucus, towards'nioon. * Vomiting of bileand mucus, * Vom-
iting isan eyncs food which had been taken twelve hours
prev . Vomiting (a, 6h.) immediately followed by
yas a couple of hours. Inelination to ; mst
retehing. * Retchingand yawning until the face beeames blue,
whilst he extends one of his above his heady and with
the other strikes violently upon his ablomen. Unasnocessful
inclination to vomit, He wakes three times about midnight;
three times ho feels as though he would vomit, being at the
same time covered with sweat as from anguish ; but no vom-
iting takes place —605. * Unsuccessful inclination to vomit ;
empty retching. He is unable to vomit; the stomach is not
‘susceptible of being irritated. He does not even vomit after
taking fourteen grains of tartar emetic ; he does not even feel
natrsoated. . ted attacks of, violent hiccough. Violent
pion | which caused her to start up into the air; this was
‘ ‘by denfness lasting till the next attack.—610, * Vio-
lent hiccongh about At: intermediate symptom,
Net eructation, partly hiccough. * Eructation resembti
iccousrh ; spasm composed of eructations and hiccowgh
Nightly hiecough with violent sweat. Convulsions of the
head ald limbs after hiceough, afierwards nausea and Inssi-
tude.—615. Hiccough with alternate convulsions of the right
arm and loft lower limb; afterwards violent thirst with red-
ness and heat of the head.



--- Page 133 ---
124 BELLADONNA.

Sromacn : Painless throbbing and beating in the pit of “4

stomach. Violent pains in the region of the pit of the
* Hard pressure in the stomach, expecially after a meat
(a. 24h.) Periodical pain in the pit of the stomach, with
tremor, at night.—620. Pressure in the stomach afier having
eaten something. Pressure in the pit of the ston partly
awing. (Stitching ache ia the left side below the ibs,
Fulness below the short ribs ; when stooping, the pit.af the
stomach feels fulland the sight isobseurdd. (a, 4d.) * Violen
ressure in the stomach after a meal, and aflerwards alsoa
ug while after, (a. ila Painful pressure in the pit
of the stomach, felt only when walking ; he has to walk
slowly. (a. 48h.) Air seemed to have gathered below the
sternum; it pees off by producing a rumbling in the abdo-
men, afier which the nausea increased more and more,
of the stomach. * Spasm of the stomach, reiting th
Chronic spasm of the stomach; it always occurred during a
meal.—630, Afier eating a little food, he felt a peculiar con-
tmetive sensation inthe stomach. Inflation of the striuery
afier lying down in the evening, with tensive iin the
stomach. Contractive pain inthe pitof the stomach.. Barn-
ing in the stomach, Stitches in the pit of the stomach.
Excessive, Jancinating and cutting pain in the pit of the sto-
mach, which forces one to bend the body backwards, and to
check the breathing. Tuflaramation of the stomach.
Anpomrn : To ion of the upper'part of the duode-
num. Buroing in’ the abdomen.640, * Continunt colic,
* Colic, constipation, enuresis with ok mpi and inclination
to vomit. Colic, a few stitches afer taking milk. Pain in the
abdomen, a fow hours previous to going to bed. Colic, spas-
modic teasion, from the chest till deep in the abdomen ; this
tension is so violent that he is unable to°move his. in the
least. (a. half an h.)—645, Colic and leucomhowa, * Picea
in the abdomen as from a stone, in the evening, with pains in
the loins, Colic, as if the abdomen were pressed upon
by a hard load; the pain is only folt when standing or
walking ; epee of when sitting, Pressure in the hypo-
gustrium as if froma heavy load, Sensation in the right
abtominal ring, when bending over while sitting, aa if a hand
body were pressing out, without the spot being hard to the:
touch, (a. 6d.)—650. Sensation in the groin, when bend
ing over while sitting, as if a hard Were pressing out,
Sensation in the men, directly below the umbilicus, as if
the intestines pressed fiom within outwards, mostly when
standing. (a.6d.) When pressing upon the scrobiculus cordis,

a . = ae


--- Page 134 ---
one feels a pain in the of the peg rs ng from
w “ Lonel senior tecuiies oF , but

om inful abdomen. Distended, hard
pemainase Sensation as if the ald were distended, with
constrictive colic below the umbilicus, coming on in jerks, and
eee bend double. (a. 4h.) Disteution of the abdo-
men around the ribs, Distent

lig Res Tonge Foe
or _ fntestine: i
side, Aching of the sheorken, ween atone: ietwheti lying

down.)—660, *Clawing, constrictive pain in the lowermost
intestines, alternating with dull stitches or jerks in the direction
of the aon h.) * Conattietion of the abdomen
od the umbilicus, as if a ball-or lump would form.
ectly after rising, in the morning, a violent teusive aching
oe abdomen, especially Jn the pubie region ; smniee oc
@ hypogastriunm yl igastrium) were sp ical
constricted, wise if it son distended, this, however rf
not really the case;) gradually increasing a decreasin
paing, 6, 90h.) Contraction of the abdomen in the umbilic
region. Griping and straining around the umbilions, which
ottized him to bend over. . *Coutesetive pain in the
abdomen ; she is obliged to bend double from pain, * Colic,
asif aspot in the abdomen were seized with the nails, a
riping, clutching, seizing as with talons. Contractive strain-
ng in the tumbilical region, especially abort noon and in the
“afternoon, * Violent contractive griping in the right side of the
abdomen when walking, accompanied by sharp stitches dart-
ing from that side through the right.side of the chest and the
asia. Extremely or contractive gripings in the umbil-
ical region, coming from both sides and meeting in the umbil-
icns—670. * Pinching colic ; he is obliged to sit with his body
bent double, with unstevessful inclination to diarrhea and
subsequent vomiting, Pinching in the intestines. Pinching
in the side of the abdomen, the region of the liver; the pain was
great that he was unable to rise-from his seat. Pineching, —
‘unsversely across the epigastrium and downwards in the
ecolon. Violent pinching in the h trium, which increases
in violence by drawing the abdomen in, and bending the upper
rt of the body on the loft side. (a, 6 h,)—675. Lancinations
in the Segoe! glands. Fine sti in the left groin, Dall
~ gtitehes in the night side of the abdomen, near the last ritis,
Violent lancinations between the right hip and the um
as if a doll knife were beigg thrust 2 (a. 12h.) One si
cutting Ianeination from the umbilical region round the left hip
as far as the lumbar vertebrie, where it is most painful. (a. three


--- Page 135 ---
4

126 BELLADONNA,

uarters of an h.)—680. Dull la tions, as if with a knife,
iw the sot on the loft aide Stitching ache in the
umbilical region, (a. 24h.) Cutting ache early in the morm-
ing, when in bed, in tHe left side of the abdomen upon which
he rests ; the pain disappears when tuming to the other side.
{a 11d.)  Veolent, inetsive pressure in the hypogastrium, in
alternate places. (a 1.) Cutting in the whole lower § pete
stinging about the um passing y rubbing. (a.

Heat with anxiety in the yas ban te face, with obstrae-
tion of the nose. Heat from w upwards, a sweat asof
anguish breaking out upon her; afterwards nausea with horri-
ble anguish, the nausea descending more and more in |
abdomen. * Long lasting painfulness of the whole
as if it were all.sore and raw. (a. 1 h,). az lgp ape rum.
bling in the abdomen.— 690, rumbling in the abdomen,
with a sensation as if all the contents were engaged in a con-
fused motion. (a. a quarter ofan h.) Rumbling and pinching
in theabdomen. Frequent emissionof almost inodorous flatu~
lence. Frequent emission of inodorous flatulence.

Sroot: Shuddering, during stool—695, Shuddering, du-
ce heave ina child. Desire for stool with sensation in the
a nas if diarrhea would come on, accompanied by heat
in the abdomen. (a. tb.) * Pa t stool sanined with
mucus. Heat in the bead alterna with diarrhma. Diar-
rhea, inclination to vomit and in the stomach—700_
* Granular, yellow, somewhat slimy stool. (Stool smells ver
sour.) Stool white as lime. Green stool, Green stool, with
enuresis and sweat.—705, Several watery stools immediately
after profuse sweat. * Soft, diarrheic stool in the beginning ;

erwards, frequent lenesmus, little or no stool being passed.

cusually diminished stool; only small ovacuations taking

place for several days. Urgent desire for stool ; itis thinner
than usual, but not diminished. Frequent thin stools with
. tenesmus ; he had to go to stool every quarter of an hour. a
pa Frequent desire for *Tenesmus; di

c stool is passed saat om , followed immediat
by increased tenesmus, (a. 3h.) ;
without any evacuation taki , or else little and
stools being ame. * Tenesmus colic. Tenosmus, no.
stool.—715, Vomiting after tenesmus; *Tenesmus, constant ©
peeing aad eee down in the direction of the anus and

geni ns, alternating with painful contraction of the
aris. (a 12h) Pinto Boater eee si
* Constipation. Constipation ; inflation of the abdomen and


--- Page 136 ---
127

ding es : he

stric ee heb (Po grains gn
den, painful itching of the rectum and anus.—725.
of the outer side of the anus (when walking in the open air,
ititching of the anus, Lei Nte: a tancinations:,
the rectum (during motion.) (a. 3 eae fh

several days. Involunt
yhineter ani—T3O, * ay ig ee feces.

. involuntary stools.
Unixany Onaans : * Suppression of stool and urine for
pg uppression of stool and’ urine, Ege asia by
dp. Pet sre tab of urine, which comes ‘off only Besa sicn
vent and desire to urinate. * Frequent
teow swine, Se gor gan passed in ay Asean a
requent

va ty natural color.
nat emission being seanty.. (a. i he 740, * Con-
pr dh salar abate * Yellow, bi aay Clear, a

urine. A rrag
eee a oes ee

isi with reddish sediment. * Frequent mcabongd Pe
quent and copious emission of urine—750, * Enuresis.  Fre-
quent and copious emission of pale, thin, watery urine. Exnis-
sion of a quantity of watery urine With sweat. Emission of
a large quantity of urine, with increased appetite and coldness
of the to the touch, Bnouresis at night, with profuse
sweat.—T55, "Bunresis ro rofuse Sprachen Enuresis,

wit the
baa paralysis of Sock. of the: blade
He passed his ek vy are while in adoep sleep.—765. * Ina-
bility ta to retain the urine, Sensation of writhing and turning
in the bladder as if thore were a large worm in it, without ising
desire to urinate. Dull pressure in, the region of the bladder
po ine ata pain immediately after micturition, in the

we Caotehe Pains! Itching titillation in the forepart of
the glans, resembling a flea-bite-—770, forsee tearing in the
tok antag aoa ‘from below below upwards, before falling asleep,


--- Page 137 ---
liz

198 BELLADONNA.

ph the evening when in bed. The prepuce recedes, ead the
glans; this causes a disagreeable: me in the
jans. (a, 4h.) Lancination all along the urethra, (a 3h
Violent pressing towards the genital organs, as if all pie
contents of the abdomen would fas wee them ; worse w
sitting crooked or when waisicn, ved when standing :
sitting straight. (a. 10h.) Dull ’ stitehes in the urethra
tween the acts of micturition, behind the glans, especia
dming motion.—775. Drawing in the seminal cords during
mictirition. Discharge of the prostatic juice from a ed
penis. Sofi, painless tumor on the glans. Sweat o
genital organs, at night. Lencinations in the testi chic
are drawn up. (a. 12,18, 30 h.)—780. Nightly emiss mt
semen, the penis boing relaxed. ‘Two emissions of semen ip
one night, irk sence se sie
step, apparently the interna fa organs,
Nistuly a aaa ob of semen, conor Hed
dreams (the first night) He remains indifferent, whon rs
ing of the difference of the two sexes; he is unable to con
ceive any lewd or lascivious ideas ; the sexual instinct §
to be extinguished in his faney. — has. Voluptuous itnages or
tales excite neither his faney nor his sexual organs ; they leave
him eneruagte (a. 20h.) "The appesrance of tho menses is
precoded by lassitude, colic, want appetite and d
ness, ‘The menses are accompa nied by sweat of the chest at
night 5 € std B Lair « and thrills of chilliness over the
nt the heart during the menses,

bs dati tee the menses—790, Cramp-lke tearitig at times in.
alternate pyre of the bac 7 back, at times “ during Pc
menses. Appearance '
phages Increased menstrnal foe lperonsal pani

8 MANS 5 they delay until the 32d, 36th, and 48th day,—

* Pressing early in the morning, ax if all the contents of
the abJomen would issue from the genital organs, (with disten-
tion of the abdomen ;) when the pressing wasover, the abilo-
— regia al ant a white mucus was agg i =

Re Deity: Frequent sneezing. Galt nose js at
times berger ape at times i discharges wate ater—800. ee

or cough with Flnent Mena one nostril on
Coryza, with | of herring-pi ° in, the - merely
when se th oarseness, |

—§05, * Noise id rAling int Srepaiiie “Bien
ration.causes an irritation bisa oe a dry cough, vine


--- Page 138 ---
body had

ali and is

titillation in the back part

wong

* Violent, d a i



--- Page 139 ---
the chest, as if it were being from ape
Shag: wiven to beay tien Seer nenaties tp
evening when in not coug fon
og he had difficulty in taking an Sompliesiodl as it he
oy esd prevented from so doing by mucus in the ;
accompanied by a burning in ie chest, { out
times he breathed, at times he appeared to
last ; these fits eceurred four times in the sp

y
orf (a... h.) Stitches in the sternum
wning. “Fine stitches under the
, duying a-walk. (a. 4d.)\—S46. * Fi
4 left side of the Pchest extending m the i
the axilla, more violent. during ion ;
breathing. Fine stitches in the chest, |
pee dex into the right side of the ¢
ting. (a. 72h.) Stitches in the side o
the right arm; they arrest the breathin; is
Stitches in varions places under the skin, in the right
the chest, rather towards the outsid . Stitehes fn ped e
the mame. (a. 3h.) * Painful ap ina ne
the chest, unintluenced by ecg
stingray nenpreyd pete 5 2 rie
ensiform cartilage and above the’ false it ats (a. 8 price)
Pinching-stitching pain in the chest on both sides of the upper
part of the stermmm. Incisive i
chest, coming and going, unintl
—855. Continuous stitching pressure |

reasing in
ifn Tiowa bao paves

© in the region of rib from
bon eo ‘Sharp ache in the sternum, immediate ly isto r
ipartlage. Aching below the ri ni
in the chest and between the shon ‘ hi oI
herd with short breathing, likewine beticeen € sedi
when walking or sitting. Clawing ache in both halves of

the chest. © pain between the sternum. and ste

hiculus cordis Pres in the right half of the chest

os anxious . Great uneasiness and beating in Ste chat
ae ee acd gtk tle the aoe

Sitiealt and i ing) 2), Asor af aati thea

when going up ing sensation. ’

re pula MeO arb dtngs eather ee ee (a.2h.) Pain-
—


--- Page 140 ---
t of the violence of the pain; he is
the buek; he is relieved

absolutely unable
by standing and walking about evry bomerer he ‘cannot

E

walk fast (for 8 days.)—875. When g from his seat, he
el ni ein a he te of he ho ia
y were eurmatic pain in . Achi
the eptoat colitnan, undae\the taleehsiiae
Gnawing inthe dorsal spine, and ap Laneinating and
gnawing pain in the dorsal spine . Lancinations from
without inwards in the vertebra, resembling stabs with a knife.
Pain, as from a sprain, in the right side of the back and the
column, Crampelike, op ve sensation in the middle of the
al colume, ges when atternpting to straighten
back. {a. + h.) back, especially the scapulm, are
covered with large, red pimples; the whole skia looks red, and
feels sore when touched ; in the tips of the pimples the prover

experiences’ fine stinging. (a: 10d.) Painin the
ing into the seapule. 886, Boil the shoulder. ‘Aching
under the left scapula, more tor the outer side. Drawing
— between the right seapula and the dorsal spine. Pain
weon the scapule, as if the parts had been strained by lift.
ing. Violent drawing between the scapulie —_ the spine, in
the evening —S90, rrr aes almost like pinching, between
the right seapula and the dorsal spine, (‘Titillating itching of
the left scapula.) Itching stinging of the right scapula, indu-
cing one to seraich the parts, eae itching of the scapulw,
going off a 4 scratching. Fine stitches about the right seap-
ula,—895, Repeated stitches, as if caused by tho electric fluid,
from the left seapula to the right. (a. 1h.) Stitching pres-

~

Las


--- Page 141 ---
R Syeiy ct toupee

132 BELLADONNA.
the top of the panes Bh) * Painful stiff.
ss between thet ui an a Asie ‘of in eck when
the n to in the i
(a. 16, hi.) Ney

Nee: Aching in the ou
the head backwards or when

sages 7

*with a
ean. (8 (a. 5. hy

Surenion

sions of the same arm.—905. The
fal. Swelling of the arm. Feeling ree ashen

* arms, more yet in the hands, as though she apis
them hang Pal Weight in beth « eye ght the left
arn—910, Paralysis of eight am lytic

coridition of the upper limbs, more haveder ei the eft
foun ( weakness in the right arm, afterwards also in
arm, (a. wien *Paralytic oe eee on the left upper arn

pate caknese edhe ee

Atel yh, rawi easure, with w ery, 1
ied “O15. “Paral tic tearing pie

ior surface arm, (a. ad.
teeth. . ,

tote or ‘Drew.
Sa ithe rd Pa ana


--- Page 142 ---
HELLADONNA. 133

clbow, it pains as if it wore ee he
the left elbow, as if water or'a heavy liquid were

the ;
bones of the left hand —45, a: Pavel rn

3
i
ze

in the.earpus ; however this impeded motion is painless (a.
h.) Painful 'drawi in the posterior of the lf and
middle Ager ) hands, appar in
thereof. Paralytic drawing in the middle-joint of the ree
index. . ‘Phe anterior joint of the middle-finger
stiff, and is painful when bending it, the pain being a simple
{sore 1) — 955. Tearing cutting in the muscles of
the little finger i

fn

P rd <2


--- Page 143 ---
134 BELLADONNA.

Seduce estesulee the ligaments of the fingers upon
thie s and causing Ceejonnas teenie. j
on Exrremrries : Soreness on the inner side \
ani Pa bain athe yeh Lee
mbling: ciao wi Seeing stinging

ving acco
by ¥ ict peal a ie ie tain nts ; one in elong oss 0 rises from
‘the tarsal joints to the <P ob poo to move the feet and
chatige ticly ye constantly while sitting, and is relieved b
walking. (a. 4 h.}—965. Occasional lassitude of the feet, w
a drawing ‘in the same. A sort of stretching ; he is
toextend ¢ lower limbs, (a. 11 d.) * Heavinest of thet

and legs hon walking, accompanied by stiffiess of the kneo-
joints. (a. 12 h.) inqraaed weight of the | Seca
discharge of yellow mucus from the nose, with
thirst.) * Paralytic drawing in the right Jower limb—970.
Paralytic weakness of the feet (lower ); she had to lie
down, ich gus Semis 3 with nausea, tremor, anxiousness-
and vertigo. * Paralysis of the lower limbs Cramp-pain
in the glutei muscles, accompanied with tension when bend-
Mp? Ue hc aakgaes Three or four ue ot in the

ip, when at rest or in motion, (q ssi

neh the the right hip-joint, (a, 1h. S Paine eet
hi Bye limping, When!

upon her right hi in se
; but when lying upon i i hip, the
Eni ids (0: 89.4) Parnlytic tension in the
as if they were sprained, Cutting eta eae
a the ‘eseigins muscles of the left thigh naiabed cain fe. a
Cutting stitches in the external muscles of the right
se above the knee, only when sitting. (a. 24 h.)—
) weight and stitches inthe thighs, when wal
Veig the i pense also when sitting. Drawing pain from
within on small spot of the internal side’ of the lef
tic 1h.) Hard pressure in the middle of the anterior
of tthe yet shige Stitches in the centre of the thigh
towards the posterior side, resembling stabs with a kn (ie i (i
sly afte aor elege A the lef thighs Ss
upper and loner part Ml h.
shregrageiihiesie right knee av Avel
ramp-pain in nipping
cia oie, when B98 ek Hong pai iva
1 rp the ie = legen tendon of the
7 i ae Rabe ok tee tae hace
" nner
outer—990, Clawing ache in the

vathaphare ke



--- Page 144 ---
4;
z
=

Sf
Bs

BEeee
as

as of innumera

expec dul ing at used commotion internally,
gee geal ey ting the og hag hang down.

a, eed through the inner
ei) Satie pak om ee eh othe Pull tear-

i a Excessive i one to
ig them,—1LOLO), Painful peling of woe Stihan t leg
when lege it aeross the left, wir in
the earing pain in the tbin, ye a ta the right.

heaves Dri ad once pain} “the a ight ia
w u
wou

with © tion in it, as if it iS
4h. 8. Bia ut stitehes in the ys
part. in the calf en toi Bip ae
Shes ia going so leg. (a.
a ‘earing and gary ~ “ifr riddle of the inner side of

he

the leg. uninfluenced cither by motion or contact.
in the forepart of the left tibia, when stand Sweat of the
fowt without ng warmth, when sitting.—1 . Corrosive ith.
ing of the feet and dorsa of the feet, Dull stitches in the dor-
sum of the lef = when, silting ; external pressure does not
alter them, ‘Tension in the right tarsal joint, when walking
inher a Pain as from o sprain in the tarsal —
when wal os bending hes foot inwards. ‘Tearing ug palate
the metit bi i in Cramp iu the sole
af the foot, in the the evening in bed, when drawing the
knees op. Burning, and scarching (grinding) sensation in the


--- Page 145 ---
136 BELLADONNA.

soles of the feet. Migr itehing of the feet. 'T in the feet
from below 1 a on ee h.) _ Swelling of 1030,
Heat, Friis in the Boring, pain in the soles
of the feet. (a. several h.) Stinging pain in ies soles of the
feet. is) Pain, as from a bruise, in the ball of the heel,
when trouding upon it, A Kind. of painjoss drawing or creep.”
ing from the heel to the toes around the pt
— 185. or tearing stitches in teeter se chile
ing in the sole of the left foot, when walking, aah accused
ee ek Tension in the sole of the fight
foot, in the region of the heel, changing to a tensive. pressure ;
pana ad upon the parts, this pain disappears Px scene
time. (a +
Genera Syuproms: Ve ul
arm, and in the back, ex’ mf viel sees ae
the evening. In the evening she attempted. to extend herself,
but she was unable to do so from pain.— M0, When roger
had reached the highest degree, it seem disappeared sud-
denly, and was Thomentarily replaced byaiae n some other
Creeping i Ni opt he tole ‘boa ii pening Goma
ree tching over the w quic ug
dhe apt to anther. * Re sealant ower pa ofthe
as far as the abdomen. Blisters (which mardi opet)
the palm of the hand and gh tbia—1
unexpected Inncination in the affected estate iy ae
head ; when walking, at every second or third stop, not when
sitting. (The places which had been affected with the lancin-
ae eens cree ery pamela nen neces) NWR gh
cane ng pain in the affected part, (a.
‘he eterna pica fT cepacia en we pers Bt
Cold, pair ng-lasting podosi-
tthe open (w to be a secondary effect.) ‘Tearing
feline in various Se le he a pees dont in the
evening when in bed ; after ring the parts, nothing but an
ht, (Grom six obra ont six th orang
nig o'clock in the evening in them
buming, kr press out from the ulcer pan
the part stiff and pera hag h.) (The teen. is
covered with a black crust looking like inspissated. blood,

‘uleer
Violent itching in the ulcer. Lh, Cutting inthe
when at see ri ara ape, ee nite ro
Seen eee saypleriecel lacy (adh) (
the bends of. the joints.) 1060. * Sudden, excessive



--- Page 146 ---
DELLADONNA, 137

cramp-pain in one wide of the chest, in one side of the abdo-
men, ina loin, or one ps pecially when ¢ the
ase £7 to bend t apected part vane ‘
fozit, (a. 8,16, 301.) (Drawing. pain in the. feet-extendi
up to the scapulm, and thence tot agers, Sally ae
which become dull and vaciflating from that pain.) (Draw
pain in all the limbs.) * Itching prickings, fone
various parts of the skin, in the evening when in bed, * Al
the symptoms are worse in the afternoon at three or four o'clock,
milder in the morning. ' 44
Spasms, Panatyers, Frrs;—l065. * Violent convulsive
laughter. * Slight convulsive movements of the limbs, Conyul-
sive moverent of the limbs. * Subsultus tendinumn.” Bab gi 0
ee rn eer
fon; m mitoron up the walls: *
the limbs with h ho 1 stage oad oie gape
pany the spasms of the limbs, *Convulsions, Convulsive,
Sore ectcued annintetonsaisd bottle pairs expecially
bo? eon t sms, expecially
lenis isan i eis convulsions cla
¢ ic convulsions, Excessive spasms, resembling epilepsy.
7 Gonvalalons, distortions of all the wiaeehn 1080, Sf of
all the limbs, * Inthe iitervals bétween the spasms, he utters
the most violenteries, as if he were suffering great pains. * ‘The
head and the restof the body are drawn backwards to the left side,
so that he was unable to walk. Insensible raling, with convul-
sions of the hands and feet. * Alternate strange contortions -
the linsbs and total immobility.—L0S3, * Loss of sensation, ti
ness of the lower limbs, extreme distention of all the blood-yessels
in the slcin, with extreniely red, bloated counte full and
eae and excessive sweat, * Frequent st s and
loft * Sti will the resembling a feeli
of weariness. Simtet ot seven . Spusmodic exten-
sion of the limbs, with distortion of the eyes.—1090. * Barly
in the morning the limbs feel weary and from pain;
she would like to alter the position of wap ‘eonstan

a to


--- Page 147 ---
138 HELLADONNA.

of irritation in the throat, for bese a <a *'Tremor and Jas
situde of the limbs. * Lassitude mbs, In the eve
he feels so tired that he is scarcely able to walk. a 50h.
—1100. Laziness of all the limbs, and want of ition
work. * Aversion rg oe vines
of the hands and feet. Wea’ -y dnt aren
strength —tLO. Great weakness. Lepr -mvaiabhapis if
drowsiness in the afternoon, “Failing of tao
Wackaies cecmatiosh ee tae a
uw gait, ees i would brea!
down ; he is unable to walk—1110. * ring,
short attacks of great weakness ; she foels as rere
drawn down by a aver as if she would sink
lytic weakness of all the muscles of the upper and lower
(a. 6d.) Paralytic weakness of pe the "ince

of the fect. * Paralytic feeling, at times sof fone a “ 8! of
anor pare * Paralysis of right lower
limb.—1115. ‘The left side, thedin ana loweriiguk

eutirely paralyzed. * chon Se fits. * Apoplectic condition.
ete four days dpi . t,and lay

om igh ii
=e aes

Mir tH. *Sopor. Deep. jag
Deep sleep, lasting two hours, rota rdgae
eels seta pale, with

re ule
mur anil a

ade . in the i Seca i heaie ries for
half; afer waking, he pte akeen a
dryness of the mouth,

afterw cough ng which was a Pe
tse led. piece
asy sleep before mitnight; the child bane seitars to
hi perch urters querwlots mands Ww lee

r directly afer having allen aster



--- Page 148 ---
scien iereceaaeee vin th ga
one recollects ve anx-
jous dreams pe Ba cho! nc? ald ph

heard himself crying aloud, cbrtty oma ig wale sey to
come to his senses, In the evening, when falling , “he
es starts from his sleep ; the feet started upwards and
head forwards. * The sleep becomes intolerable from the
pera increase of the pains and a dreams, He starts
and wakes when on the poi rer haoayy bean p. She wakes up
pute the night full of fright and fear; faraainied something
under her bed uttered a sound ; she felt a dry heat when
waking up.—1140. She started violently as with fright dnsing
her otherwise calm sleep, she imagined she had a deep
* He starts as with fi Sc a
vents one from a tly s ESS
poh to faa Pp a drawing baits’ in. ihe limbs. Start-
ing in a dream; this wakes him up, his forehead and: the
serobiculus F(cocia| being covered | sweat—1145, He is
constan iy soa fads he recta Meh ppd
vulsions. his he opens his eyes, casts wild looks
— and falls back vera into his sopor, with raling breath-
During the night he was tormented by dreams which
fatigned the mind ah deal ; in the morning, when trying to
get up, he feels qui te exhausted. When about to fall
knew not ser he was dreaming or awake. Vé
dreams, which he wax unable to recollect —1150. In the eve-
ning, when lying in bed, he imagines he Aoi along with

his couch; ten suecessive fi Baier ge down, he
imagined he was floating along his bed. yin the
morning he is unable to rouse bituself from his slee anton

he is much out of ep Pose
Cie hile pcb She sloeps van urn
from oa sleep by a cough, she Tals aslee Fnraiapenkcl immediately
After the « ceases ; nevertheless, she feels tired and giddy
in the moring. He. bf a ited wakes up from his sleep;
finally he is unable to fall asleep suain, a“ find eels
although he may ever so much 1156.
prays ote breathing at night, both mathe andawoke;
iration and expiration last half as vote ju is the inter:

seh tone taas frepleaticns eee a the bps
eh radeon he expat (St


--- Page 149 ---
140 BELLADONNA.

is unable to sleep at a vented from sleeping by
his fancy, os onan he be ein omen to stiaee te
—1160, Little sleep, Sleeplessiess his, * Con
tinal sleepiness with tendency to stretch one’s limbs, in the
exning Nose five to hight) Slee ae gaa pred we
nution ofthe pains, at n leeplessness,—11 tin
cloudiness and Retna * Drowsiness. (a. 4h.) Drowsi-
ness and yawning, at twilight; in the morning one feels as
though one had not slept enough, * Headache and great insae
tude when waking from sleep. Inthe morning, ae Bayle
up, headache over the eyes, a feeling of weight in th
when touching the eye then, it feels sore—1170, * Tired nee
giddy early in the morning. Drowsiness, immediately after
waking. Slumber. Slumber, with a small, weak, unequal
pulse, ‘Drowsiness fall of uneasiness. —1175, Violent ‘Are
ness. Frequent stretching of the limbs, and yawning if the
afiernoon, with lachrymation. (a, 48 a nent yawning.
Yawning, like that mee pase uent yawn-
ing, a8 if one had not slept
Fever :—1180, Foverish lige Raa ey ey
otherday. Fever afierovery Evening-fever, * Violent
thirst.—1185. * Violent chides i midnight and early in the
morning. Auxious thirst, Very troublesome thirst. * Exees-
sive thirst for cold water, (a. 4h.) He-is tormented by a
ag thirst and by hest, and desires to drink from time to
ut when offered a drink, he repels it—1190. Afier the
sweat, the thirst increases and the appetite decreases, A good
deal of thirst and dryness in the mouth at night. Thirst, fre-
quent micturition and obscuration, of especially in the
morning. Great thirst, early in the Great thi
vent gpa ype soplees prea She pe
coll as snow, and apparently li * ley snr ahiogl
in the mornin mevene igh at the head and wh ing ned
of the inte Mens in evening.
weite Rael waa ccmeanea with of blood to
the heed Coldness over the sii Shae ig the



--- Page 150 ---
HELLADONNA. M1

arts, with goose-skin, wher olf the ¢ accompa-
nied ‘by redness and heat of the cars and rose. and
areca Pt gooxe-skin, even ae es near a warm stove.
(a. Lh. 0. Feverish chilliniess, with painful fine e stinging
in the. She feels a shuddering when coming in contact
with » cold draft; however she feels more confortable in the
open air. * Extreme sensibility to the cold air.  Proquent
yeni ee tderig thrills of chilliness over the skin, in the
geen, , over the arms and abdomen, not the
hea. 2 hotel Slight shuddering afier noon, with ob-
over one arm. Shurdde
ier coe ieee _Pavorish'’ sh and cold hands.
Fever, towards evening; *a seererare uddering lifts him
up itn his bed ; in two beat and gonira) sent tonseicss,
without thirst’ either one the shuddering or heat—1220,
Short intermittent thrills of shuddering along the back, ‘with-
out any subsequent heat. Small, slow pulse. Fever: feverish
chills carly in the morning, followed by slight heat, Fever:
Thrills of slight chilliness over the 'y :
Sour hours afterwards, » Seating of heat, with vane ae
of the face. * Pever: shor
joined by heat of the body, frequent micturition a
of the limbs; a similar attack oecurred twice in the “<i fo
lowing, with vertigo and thirst—1225. Fever: chilly shud-
dering through the whole body, thrills of heat in the after-

noon, * Fever: in the when undressing herself, she
felt some chilliness over the , afterwards heat on the whole
ba sewed om the dist ise che sueceeded by
i he fs i oer ling tr a couple Fret tah hicet:
eo previous ert +

during coe heats heats heme during the chilliness,

vd pe Bigiion away sets weeat anitieaes a little head-
sc nih not the face, but no headache either

Bese iie opty aerate tar pli
gb treble pedlahinn ly, without any thirst either
in the chilly or hot stage.—1230, Fever: external coldness
with eral rin heat. Fever? * alternation of chilliness
and heat. * sudden alternation of chilliness and heat,
with drowsiness by day, Serna aay, Us heat caccasting (a. 12
a.) * Several attacks "fover in one day, the heat succeeding

the chilliness in a few minutes or half an pe ypiabdoneinde
ee ee nen Om eee


--- Page 151 ---
142 RELLADONNA.

obtusion of the head. Fever: *chilliness, afterwards hearin
the evening when in the chilliness began at the os sacrum,
ran along the back and down again along the lower limbs-—
1235. Boast — Prost i moh poles ee
stall, quick pulse. | requent pulse, inereased by ten
beats. Violent heat.—1240, * xin * Great heat all
over the body, with delirium, * Burning heat, cither external
or internal. “Internal burning. * General dry heat of the
extremities of the feet and hands, with absence of thirst and
leness of the face, for 12 hours. —1245, Internal heat, barn-
in the region of the stomach, Internal heat; she finds
every thing she eats, so cold, * Acute fever, burning fever.
Burning fever. (a, 12h). * Burning heat of the | vy with
ag distended veins of the skin, and rage.—1250, * Great

istention of the external verry and nnquenchable thirst,

Distention of the external veins. * tion of the veins of
the limbs; the carotids throb so violently that the lower jaw,
when standing a little off from the i strikes against it at
every pulsation, and thus a slight ‘ of the weth is
produced ; accompanied by wanuth aud a feeling of warmth
over the whole body, but especially about the bead. * 'Throb-

wz of the arteries in the head and in all parts of the body,
early in the morning, when waking up. At night, pence
towards morning, he feels too hot in his bed, nevertheless: he
dares not uncover himself; the uncovered parts are painfal, as
if they were froren.—1255, * Great heat of the body, more
violent aud frequent pulsations of the tersporal arteries, with a
dull feeling of the head, and subsequently profuse sweat.
* Every day, afier dinner, great heat of the body, especially the
head, so that the face becomes very red from time to time,
* Every day, towards noon, sudden heat, and redness of the
countenance, and the whole body, with great obscuration of
vision and great thirst, one hour, * Sensation of heat, with
actual heat over the whole body; especially however in the
face, which was red and covered with sweat, with obtusion of
the head. (a. 4.h.) (Heat of the hands and feet, in the even-
ing, but not of the See ee Slight motion
ie Lageneyo-enaiel the body. * Redness and heat of the

ee, wit great thirst. Inflammation of the surface of the
whole body. Redness of the whole body. * Redness of the
whole body with a quick pulse-—1265. * Heat of the whole
body with violet redness of the whole skin. * Red swelling of
the whole body. * The whole body is swollen, burning hot, and
red. Genertl hot (inflammatory) and cold gangrene, (with
rapid putrefaction of the body afte: death.) Sudden phlogoses:



--- Page 152 ---
BELLADONNA. 143

Quick! hlogoses and and asthma, *° Red
RF yf See) fer seta gic * Prickling are acharting
eénsation in the whole skin, edpastaily of the soles of the feet.

"Tingling sensations. og te eos Pedy. Ons P-

tion OF red pots as from flea-bites, (a, 4 h.)— ;

ud abn oneal » serail, red, somewhat elevated,
y

pee
us, Bei pel pi Inge pe aoe |
J) spots over the body, ofan irregular shape. (a, 16 h.)
ine tne whol body, especial Hy in the face, on
tie beck chet, * pe yorbenpramee saree
—1280, Daskra, seat cole spots on the whole body,

ser glhnel A fig ded the nose, sd dileied papi yeh

v ait, without any
usely over the whole when walking in thee n
a ‘etl and is nach Pepe ay ae a
taken cu ight-sweat, whi a tse —

Profuse night-sweats, which * not a) a
sweat, Sweat in the ing. Profuse sweat. ool sweat
on the forehead, (a. 1 h.)—t Violent sweat hor et:

aweey ae ice after midnight, Direct

<p he wak coyered with sweat, (he was stairs to fall

he eee gpl i during the waking hours,
sigh ND rea during the Bight sieon, but some sweat
hate a separ sleep,—1300. Sweat on
paring. ie Sweat over the atl
ps afternoon until midnight, afte
pe ge sweat. eve sweat with enuresis.
long continued sweat, leaving, spots on the linen. S

general, a as sudden! Src sweat.—1305, Sweat as

soon a& he covers himsel especially on
the upper limbs, Only those sweat which are covered
hn foathor-bed, in agen At Sic iwaoriiuadciook Ia

r, after wakin [Lk Nan apoio tei ah


--- Page 153 ---
144 BELLADONNA.

termittent sweat, earl s Bryn sug atthe
rising to the pags a As svat Ne i L
afierwards she felt prorseabsh the fe
neral sweat breaks out aie covering the hands withale
Seathiers bed; but general coolness sets in: when uncover
ing them—I310, ‘Tremor. He starts ¥> Sopecialip aaa when
a Pe on by day sh ha
OnAL SyMevToms ; t vi
Sore eee ag ae as ae
* Great anguish about Ansious and
+ Anticiatenr a Os peasortal seeontat maces Meme sigia
* Frequent moaning, a early in the
mentioning why, aud
ae diac aap aod
ternating pi ancing.
seamd while his hands. in|
ragga with sweat an hour afterwards, Evens
therto expected “he ia a mie Ae
feeling of a
horrible would take piace Is
-tolemble anguish in the mente ori ‘gies wy ees
this makes feel desirous of dying. *Anguisly pe
heart, headache, sto gpena Seas bitterness of the
towards noon and Auxiousness and uneasiness

bind more incoherent, iz » evening, Delirium, Conn

fe hac hibareoc bons Foulsaeadr sak corte
ir her rture as a

Kalee hak Ib hard-to pO lunche iveaine ererysttleat aka on fire.

Talks wbout wolves ; full pulse.—1340, Delirious prattle about

that him. He ix beside



--- Page 154 ---
spate
alae

it and impetuous
ed with
20

BBs &. bay!
Hae,

Mile Hee ie



--- Page 155 ---
146 BELLADONNA.
* Weeping, and extreme ill humor when waking up from

up and down in deep ge * Want of disposition mee
to any thing whatever, DOH
tal activity. Alternate PA ag gil ‘tosaedh pon 4
her life with ea her. thy, ty ma ok
her li out moving an
impression upon her; ina ee ys she becomes

“Want ot cierto ving ves a inti
*Want of c out chatte
ent to her. | che, with pressure as from a stone, during
which she moana pt out fut of hutnor by te. No
disposed to talk.—1395. reco Sggi
noise and the visits CA ons 4 apa ; offensive ile

be chicas aed te ihe ne next xt day his a a 4

ade ti camavael i
or that thing, nanie cd eit ae ys

thoughts then. (a. oe
with every thing, and
*She is very much ircitated’ yciegers easily vexed and then
He becomes angry casily, even at trifles. Horrible
and curses, in detached syllables.— 1405, *
which is either continual or returns in paroxysms, first of a
merry pature, and afterwards changing to rage. * Howling
ining en inl the pps bel cally nied ane
i) ; mpils bei con-
tracted. lent quarrelsomeness, which | i be ie

“Out at bm, he was
even dissatisfied with



--- Page 156 ---
i iti le —

gagsseelegeilie | HH
: HULA iil ial Ht

ighee Hi aa he Ha

i zl tf Le evista. |

gia ai oan
gene 2 ag = 2.
ae dele



--- Page 157 ---
148 RISMUTH.

toms, Nos. 26, 43 and 46, show that the praises which Odier,
Garminati, Bonnat sem bestow ‘the oxyde of Bis-
muth in certain forms of pain or ire in th ‘oF
me wer ce eaat oe in Benen
are u 1 wornemapatite t ati
te dr to thowe diseases i a
¢ homeopathic character e treatment
Linn ec, Snes ie tene
pe rages PAR TMi latedtad oot hero tanh

pela mg were ren the hablo expostg the Hives

Gucchiler chica naaeiotnes long and most:
ion bette Be Bismuth is homeopathically indies
one st one alge dow f small porno tse of gti I
cient to effect a cure,
titable to 1h i ike Bian ks ob Rec
su to phaae x bit, and lytic
Soa arthef Ulcthenta Eat el in lua Sova

ae
i

Gaver



--- Page 158 ---
is: ‘day. Pain in the chest and back; of
» - -

| OBSERVATIONS OF OTHERS. '



--- Page 159 ---
he would vomit; especially violent aftera meal. “Prexsure
int the stomach, expecially a mpeg
neat: Lond rae se of the abo
men, when standing. (a. abdomen,
without any sensation. ran i the abdomen,
we Frequent emission of feel-

in the abdomen, ‘emir dee a. Sh.)
P inching pain in Siler in: a places. (a. 7 by)
Pi pain in the abdomen in alternate Pog wit
granting and rumbling. Pincking pressure in th Coun
picddirnghe tenesmus ; sensation kr he would xo
- ar negate in the ares | any evacuas
in. (a.
Uninany "Oueaiea: ent and copious micturition =
the urine is watery, (a. 12h.
Gexrrat Ongaxs: Aching of the right testicle, more”
violent when touching it. (a. 2h.) Pollution atnight, ‘without
Memeer: Fukootbiet | in the middle of the sternum, une
BEST : *
altered either by vation or paar i (a. 8 h.)}—40.
Tearing around and Biagio! ve Sere seedhig
More or jc viet acing in the ight hal ofthe chest, near
the sternum, ised Seema 1 Be ration or ex-
piration. (a. 4h.) Hard pressure near the left: between



--- Page 160 ---
a : 28nF Dye

* HEE aceite fu ua il a i
if iat Hive HH Ht zi
| j faa ae Lf a alt | al
wae ef Jae te Suu Urea
Aue que Fipneerini dint?


--- Page 161 ---
152 BRYONIA ALBA.

and fell asleep immediately, having vivid and confused dreams,
in the Sovenocbie ail Bscesiisa devaeihaes 6 a few hours
riving ; but he was unable to take his usual siesta
want of sleep, for several days. Violent startings ch the
ning, When slumbering, as if he fell down, (p. 14+

ent waking, at night, Uae pip mie as if &

se sig sles fe aswean iat
tur coon
lutions, sometimes without any—90. Ai night
back. Frequent waking, at t mght, with leasitede
of heat over the whole body, pS tr plea p=
eee ans

8 a.
Mona Bracbine: Restless ill-humor: ¢

contrary to him; at cues he seats himself, at times
down, at times he walks Nnpidheciadlap rma Waele
pice d aa oer ths Bosse sche gers becoring di
agreeable to him,

po wa uo willl more cheerful in the evening.
, and chseltytel with his condition ; he

about t, He allernately commences one thing,

enmheri without finishing any, Solitude is intolerable to

Th

ial He
- , ~s
fe fal

ze
sin.

FE

BRYONIA ALBA.

out the root of the unece
Bin Lechvopnoghe brad aed pow ten Arce ee

A large dose of this atts a couple of weeks.

Manrot the effects at yoni Srecunesdeoaeso|ah
Rhus tox. Bryonia affects the mind datthecol. fm huss
pepe ash geben wits! ead
its mdet apg are chiefly ex 8 rated
although the secondary effects :

always sghanis the desired effect in first 24 hours; the

exit constituting the series of the sccondar

peeing after the first, neutralizes in part the effects.


--- Page 162 ---
I ction of Tacytia to bene ogee ta cna us as
the truly hommopathic and therefore
is witnessed in a few other drags (see
to Ignatia), but rarely in Bryonia. —
asscls adeatatiered deccoeSiegontey vies see OoiatnOgie ts
onia ; or else some
which is homaopathic to the untoward symptoms. Cumphor,
for instance, above all other drugs.

FROM NOACK AND TRUNKS.

Bryonia is suitable to nervous, dry, thin and
bilious individ a choloric tem nl; to people
with brown complexion, t brown or black hair, irritable charac-
ter, and dispostion to of the dermous tirsues.
— Diseases of women and children are especially eugene
by Bryonia, inaymuch ax it corresponds with
bility, 74 anerey const tation of reaction, inclination to wife

sions and seo galetoon diseases, and
likewise ees the peri-
Seuss sd an "and eapllary ne gs giving rise to

¢ betwoen inflammation and nervous.
oration. abt $8 ond the rt relations with the secretory

a . cea erly in nfiltrations, serous offu-

is ially efficacious in:

prorat ar the pan witous, and rheumatic cha-

racter prevails, or sehen toms pass into the
nervous ste Jions brought om by cxtching cold in dey cold
weather ‘ NOEL O,

ger, excessive bo ily exertions ind; bat connec of chagrin

-- =


--- Page 163 ---
154 BRYONIA ALBA.

conditions which are and chills
and coldness of the pial tyre mye ave epealy related to Mase:
ont Brnse a ought erin 0 be considered in

eases of a rheumats us and catarrhal nature-— Equally

violent irritations of the nervous aud circulatory system
are characteristic ea i, a a Bryonia.
Acute and chronic inflammations of sing

affections, with in vt oan dea meee of the soft ich
and feverish feelt

ns consequent
suppressed scarlatina, Sean that kind of
ontidaria which is influenced repo onthe weather)
purpum contagiosa et ha erythema intertrigo,
erysipelas, especially erysi inflammations of the joints ;
pustidous : impetigo, poi varioloid (especially in ihe

presen Hhiaria
especially in chi also raowoniy bar, and lying- 4 women ;
Bryonin Ls a i sone
ee Gia hien wetvedinn avatunt ‘rheumatic milia rin; tuberculous :

and ion the
glands ; glandular ulcers.—Acute Sianaten (rheumatic
pains in the temples, in the forehead, with a of num
néss in occiput and wry-neck) ; rheumatic fever, with
catarrhal and gastric « uti tearing in the whole

sibility of the tips of the and toes ; vomiting of a watery —


--- Page 164 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 155

and slimy, bitter liquid ; pains in the 1 of the liver and
athe + uneasiness and heat, night, with increase
the pains in the head aud | by motion ; rheumatic and
fevers, with intense action of the ecar:

accompanied with increased —Intermit-

tent fevers. reagate, ay astric reese: rheumatic ailments,
tnt Ser with sit, accompanied with a to

ronatipation; Deatioc bangers Sey

with vertigo ; pressure in and oppression

vant ane see ter Regt at

parse to sia aa aba deal of.
Sr bare heat, ist altemating
vith et To afterwards burning, with
per haagi

iota aang

appears a dry cough, exciting vomiting, and accompanied

stitches and tightness of the chest ; fertian intermittent, with
vertigo, headache,

antici characterized

oe eat chen breathing, chilliness, and subse-
quent great hent, delirium, unquenchable thirst, with dry
cough, and Instly sweat ; fever, prions 5 mostly of the cold
stage; intermittent fover, with stitches in the sides an d abdo-

an

a

excited sensibilit ah enitssna 4 oinek Mtnasisiois tots
dry, burning rod dry lips, dry, conted tongue, pressure in the
pit of the stomach and constipation ; brit mariner oureatitte


--- Page 165 ---
of the stomach being cnet the touch ; second eee
ae be tid uc

i syten
Lee Sent feels yer weal, ont pe ber
chic oa aie cae ae
r
in the sv sie ith onevasiag? stool aa es Sigh Sebris, gastri¢n
pe rfote = fac nae short, recount rena
breath eget agit grasp clved

inc Upset he yan ie his
t in contact
©, tite, lass of taste, Toone npr ins” ra
Retll ne Graces tueieased on of
the: abdomen, constipation, cessation of the loc continual
violent hese through the whole , with violent thirst for
cold Gach being intern ‘by slight ae
of the faee violent, cutting pains in the
ti ravated os motion, and hard, frequent, small pulse.
seat fer: se - sompambnlism. — Cephalalgia,
rien by te dd cen by <i
lagrea an tari emales;
cepalagra and in the ee af the hoad, rig ted

ue head, cone or sneezing ; hatihoihe, continuing from
ery ae fe.
Sy ae

bright Tig ight ad

peice vine and i nation pedis
and aachaitis, ‘especially in the sec

Cerebral a vetions consequent upon the utara
also ophts neonstorut :



--- Page 166 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 157

Sees oe .

Peete re sory merino noe at hyd eae
of spiritnons: SSE Fehon ay and bepati shall inflan
mary. ¢ oulinane A the Erp gitar affections of the ab-

ic
tabor-pains. ots with burning .

psa ogrne uish and Ee er (next His Wotadoubay
Se Peuppuax. Sales together with Mercury);
yi ogee who do not

" ites otc cute
ci tare
3 bad con ueniees from

Negev



--- Page 167 ---
158 BRYONIA ALBA.
teution and pain of the same apis aibnlgertgsne, *

takir
lastly, st is
yoruting (in this case Nux v. may be ex

1 talking, especial! violont earl in the morning and i and in.
i ha with: wai expactooltions in individ ae
lungs have been weakened by former pneumonie, and
quent of blood. — Canvulvive cough, with viole
oe peter if te che Pe:
wi Femnoptyaie—sehets tic inflammations of the

ae petra ig strc past

B. Accord Wi Bryonia has hitherto

employed too shank ana to0. soon in pleuritis. ( sr

Wurm's excellent treatise on in Griesselich’s Hygena,

vol, X11, p. 1.)—Rheumatic itis, without any fever ; gas

apr ap —Parenchymatous inflammations of the
#9,

without any nflamme-
tions of the lungs, with less commot reer chicane ry sys-
tem, the feve Bigg, Ss sid cs acerbic
and the heat in the pining ntti sens emma
chy wonton yrs sige aoa bey
‘to rium; bloated countenanes, dryness
ini sect ther ha al Sygtogeer tu



--- Page 168 ---


--- Page 169 ---
160 ARYONIA ALBA. —

fuels most so when He demands things which
pacaphapet ts He am to be. ane him imme
diately ; but when given, he does not care Want
of memory, inability to recollect things. ( (a. 4h.) * His head
felt heavy, like a hundred weight. Great weight in the head,
and pressure of the brain from behind forw Stupefoction
of the head—20, Gloominess of the head until the nortnaa
even et i tape ci the, een
hen waking when opening and je eyes.
aches, as t the w tin
does ral to ihe ae eee ead hn

e2 7:
Fe
ie 2
i
sis
tle
t?

Z
elkiiis
agfigesls Ss
= 24
THEE
Die
Fat ys
abde
2 et

ms ef
fg cae Ge
Hiigigiii

hy in Wins prising es as
8 resem pata ard h presses upon a sore
Spot. h e; searching (grinding pressure



--- Page 170 ---
BRYONTA ALBA. 161

on a small the right half of the brain, being in relation
with a poinful su i gland, through a sort of search-
ing (grinding) VC a ee the upper
me EE om
ng, a ing, r [ to malar
jaw-bones. ring across the forehead, followed by

in the cervical muscles, and afterwards tearing in the right arm.
* Lancination in the head through both temples, when walk
in the open air. * Lancinations in the » from the fi

to the occiput. ‘Turning sensation in the right side of the fore-
head, and a lancination in the left—45. Pain in the hend,
rather darting than throbbing, the face being hot. Throbbi
in the right side of the head, which may be felt externally

the Headache on the top of the tised, early in the morn-
ing when waking up, a kind of painful thro . Pain in the

Throbbing headache eyes so as to prevent her
from seeing ; during motion the throbbings in the head are
more rapid ; she ks she hears them.—50, Chi in the

head, as of grasshop A sort of rgling in both temples,
Pain in th parkpley we If bonne one polled him thie et in
that part. * Burning Oe ae Ste HE 8 OHI, Mee OR Re
Suity scalp (et ERE OR: Kastasy Sono oF tne Baty aaaty
iry sealp (at t. . Greasy oft ear
fa es tne ei the head cool ; the hands become auc
when com! the hair, (m Lh.) Violentitching of

© top of the head when combing the hair, (Painful throbbing
in all the parts of the face, which was felt when touching the
pre lsc Tension of the occipito-frontalis mus-
f° Dullness and vertigo of tho head. *.A kind of vettigoas

eS
x
z
5
Ee
ES
RE
se
cf
FE
Fi
se
S

ite
= o,
i

H
*
i

fl

u
i
E

zz
i
2
i

=


--- Page 171 ---
162 BRYONIA ALBA.

—15, * Excessive heaviness of the head, (frequently, and also
a.4d.) Dull painin the occiput, Dull pressure in the ocei-

ut. Throbbing pain in the forehead, he had to lie down.

Searching (grinding) pressure in the anterior part of the
brain with pressing towards the forehead, especially violent
when 5 a or walking fast ; walking fatigues hima
good deal. (a, 24 h.)—20. a violent aching in the fore-
head that he is searcely able to stoop. * Pressure from within
outwards above the left orbit, in the brain, which ends ina

ressure upon the eyeball from above downwards. (a, 3d.)
Semilateral headache, accompanied by a disagreeable pressure
in the eye of that side (in the afternoon). ‘Tearing pain in the
left side of the head. (a. 24h.) * Compressive pain in both sides
of the head.—25. Single stitches in the forepart of the forehead,
with gloominess of the head. Itching prickings in the right
half of the occipito-frontalis musele. ting tearing from
the right malar bone to the temple, externally, more violent
when touched, The head aches, especially when touched,
inestly in the forepart, for twenty-four hours. Soreness of one
side of the occiput, when touching it—30, Heat in the head
and face, with redness ofthe latter. * Violent heat in the head
and fhee.}

Face anv Eyes: Tension of the skin of the fice, when
moving the facial muscles.—60, Red spots in the face and on
the nee = twodays), Dim-sightedness of the left eye, as if
it were fullof water. Weakness of sight, early in the morning :
whet she attermpted to read, all the letters looked blurred.
POLLY the lor was not able to see things at a proximity.
a. 24h.) lower eyelid is sometimes red and inflamed,
the upper eyelid twitches,—65, Agglutination of the eyelids
early in the morning, they are somewhat red and swollen, and
cache as if they had Awe rubbed and heated. Pressure in the
eye, early in the morning, as when one presses upon the cye
with the hands, or as when one is ina room full of smoke.
* Swelling and agglutination of the eyelids early in the morn-
ing. Swelling of the lower eyelid, with internal aching ;
agglutination early in the morning. *Sensation as of san
being in the eyes, which forces one to rub the eyes—70. * Sensa-
tion in the right eye, in the afternoon, asifa grain of sand were
in it, Sudden ful swelling of one eye, in the forenoon,
without an ; pus comes out, the conjunctiva is
dark-red and swollen, * Lachrymation of the eyes in the o
air. Itching of the margin of the left upper eyelid, mingle
with burning and tearing. Itching, with occasional smarting
of the outer canthus of the left eye, which cannot be relieved by


--- Page 172 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 163

rubbing, (a, 6 h.)}—75, Lachrymation of the and itching
of the eyelids, as when a sore is healing ; he had to rub the
rt.

[* Flushes of heat over the face. * Paleness of the face for
twenty-four hours. * Red, hot, soft bloatedness of the face.—
35. Swelling of the left side of the face, along the nose, with
some pain in the swollen part (during diarrhwa,) * Consider-
able swelling of the upper half of tie tare, especially below the
eyes and above the root of the nose, with swelling of the eye-
lids ; he was unable to open the left eye for four days. (a. 3 d.)
*Contractive pain in the right ovbicolards palpebrarum, Red-
ness and ing of the ids with pressure in the same, for
three days. (a.3.d.) Pimple in the lower lid of the lefteye, of the
size of 07 5 wean nlp peseeton i x sexieee or (a. 24
h.) 40. Soft tumor in the in canthus of the left eye, a
aa deal of pus oozes out from time to time, for ten days. (a.

d.) When waking in the moming, he is scarcely able to
open his apes ea nea te lids being aggiutinated. Pain
as from a burn above the left eye and on the left side of the
nose, somewhat diminished by pressing the parts with the fin-
gers. Pain as if the lefteye were being burnt from within out-
wards. (a.24h.) Pressure in the eyes, with a burning and
itching sensation of the eyelids ——45. Pressure in the eyes, for
sixteen days in succession. Pressure in the right eye
rather from above downwards. (a, 3d.) Peeking in the right
eyeball. * Frequent lachrymation, Small herpetic eruption
on the sight cheek. (a. 4 d.}—S0, Swelling of the right cheek,
close to the ear, with burning pain. (a.4d.) Painful pressure
Peyny right malar bone, going off by external pressure.
at

Earns anv Nose: Slight roaring in the forepart of the right
ear, *Sensation as if the ears were stopped up, and as if no
air could get in, When returning home froma walk, he feels
alternate stitches in both ears, from the ears —80,
Violent aching of the rightconcha. (Uleerated concha.) Fre-
quent tingling and tickling of the septum of the nose, espe-
cially when blowing the nose. * Swelling of the left side of
the tip of the nose, with a darting pain and o sensation when
touched, as if they would ulcerate, Painfully sma
ulcer in the left nostril—S5, * Bleeding from the nose, follow
by thoes nostrils. Bleeding from the nose. (a. 48, 72 h.)
* Bleeding from the nose, lasting a quarter of an hour, early in
the morning after rising. Bleeding at the nose yin ton
early in the morning at 3 o'clock; it wakes him. (a. 4d.)
Bleeding at the nose, without having stooped previously,


--- Page 173 ---
164 BRYONIA ALBA.

Pinching pressure in the glenoid cavity of the right jaw,
ae stcluot hava: mation, yp ene in ot the acer
as with small bells. (a. 1h.) Contractive pain in the meatus
auditorius, going off after the wax had been removed with the
finger, but returning nevertheless constantly, with hard hear-
ing—55. Sensation in the meer Day sea sprigs as = it
were being pressed upon wi © : sensation
increases when ing While reading. pain around the
left ear. Pain as of the interior of the left ear burning from
within outwards. (a.6h.) Burning at the lobule of the ear.
Hard tumor behind the car, frequently changing its size. i
24 h.}60, Tumor before the ear, bursting open after the
lapse of 12 hours, a humor ps Ne from it, and forming a
ellow scurf. Swollen nose, with bleeding roa hashie days.
a, 5d.) ng from the nose, three days in succession,
i oe from the nose, several times a day, a
rtnight. ing from the nose, (a, 10, 16 d.)—65, Bleed-
ing from the right nostril. (a,9d.) Daily, profuse bleeding
from the nose. (a, 14d.)

Jawa anp Teern :-—90, (A littl pimple on the chin, with
stinging = when touched.) Painfully burning vesicle on
the vermilion border of the lower lip. ption under the left
corner of the lips, smarting as if the parts had been excorinteg.
i i ri pho perks ay ay halo mt pocer ve cag eta

, iiehing smarting as from sal cinating, intensely
painful darting between the lower lip and the gums, as is expe-
rienced in cancer of the lip ( in the morning when in bed).
—5. Toothache ; ee and tions in the teeth in the
direction of the ear, w obliged her to lie down.' Darting
toothache, in the evening when in bed, at times in the upper,
at times in the lower teeth (in the evening, when in bed)
(for one hour); when the pain was in a tooth of the upper row,
and the tooth was touched with the tip of the finger, the pain
suddenly ceased, and affected the opposite tooth of the lower
row. (a.5d.) Darting toothache, while he smokes tobacco
as usual, (a. 1h.) All the teeth vacillate; this is perceived
when touching them or when pressing them against one
another. Pain of a molar tooth when chewing—100, Tooth-
ache, when taking something warm into the mouth. When

! There are several uced by Bryonin, which oblige one
to lie down; compare 170, 313, 423, (222,) or atleast to wit, 181, ond seve-
which are iy wal nnd standing, 184; the alternate
effacta of Bryonia, when the eymptomn are relieved by motion and become


--- Page 174 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 166

eating, one suffers with a tearing and lancinating toothache
(the lancinations extending to the cervical muscles) aggravated
by warmth. Pain as if the tooth baaahew er ved in and
taken out of its socket (the pain is only momenta-
rily diminished by cold water, but ly relieved when walk-
ing in the open air); accompanied by tearing in the cheeks and
Fineling in the ears, at night until six o'clock in the morning.
‘oothache ; when opening the mouth, the air rushes in and
causes a pain. ‘Toothache after t (at three o'clock) as
when an exposed nerve becomes painful from the cold air rush-
ing in; the pain becomes insupportable from lying on the unaf-
fected side, and does not pass off till one turns to the affected
side.—105. When drinking something cold, a sore pain is felt
in the tooth. ‘The gums are painful, as if they were sore and
raw, the teeth being vacillating, which makes them painful.
Spong pons Simple pain of one of the submaxillary glands,
or as if it were pinched. (a 12h.)
[Drawing, from below upwards, towards the ear, with
sure in the throat, Pain of the back part of the throat, w
is felt during motion. ‘Tensive stiffness of the left side of the
neck.—70. Rheumatic stiffness in that region of the neck which
is near the nape of the neck. ‘Tension of the nape of the neck,
when moving the head. supine Beet motion of the left
side of the nape of the neck and the neck, the muscles of the
face and the muscles of deglutition; the pain makes the
tirning of the head and mastication difficult and almost impos-
sible, (a. 24h.) Itching prickings of the neck, especially
after having walked fast ; they induce him to seratch the
parts ; after scratching they pass off. (a.24h.) Fissure in
the lower lip.—75. Burning in the lower lip. Small, ulcerated
blotcheson the lower lip, painfully burning when touched, A
small elevation near the corner of the mouth and rather on the
lower lip, severely bleeding from time to time, for six days.
Sensation, carly in the morning, as if the molar teeth were too
longs they were so loose, that they might be bent to and fro
with the fingers; she was unable to use them for the
of chewing, and, if she did, they felt painful and as if
would fall out of their sockets, fifteen hours. (a.48h,) His
feel to him asif they were too long —s0, Drawing, sometimes
darting toothache in the molares of the left upper jaw, only
during and after a meal, the toeth feeling as if they were
too long and vacillating to and fro. (a, 6h.) Drewing pain
in the molares of the upper and lower jaw, (a.24h.) Exces-
sive toothache when at rest, and especially when in bed, abat-
ing when chewing. Sensation in the lower jaw, as if there


--- Page 175 ---
166 BRYONIA ALBA.

were a pimple on the bone, caneing a tensive pain when touched
or when turning the head. (a, 61h.)

Movrs anp Turoat: Painful stiffness of all the muscles
of the neck when moving it, and roughness of the throat when
swallowing —110. Smarting, itching eruption around the neck,
especially after sweating. * Stinging in the throat when touch-
ing it from without, or when turning the head. * Stinging in
the throat when swallowing, Pressure in the fauces as if he
had swallowed a hard body with sharpcomers. Sheis unable
to swallow either solid or liquid food; it chokes her.—1L15,
Sti when swallowing, as if the throat were swollen
nierually or full of mucus, which one is unable to hawk up.)
* Sore throat; dryness and rawness of the throat during empty
deglutition ; when drinking, this sensation passes off fora short
while, but returns shortly ; the pain is worst in a warm room,
Dry focling in the back part upper partof the throat. (a.
48 hb.) Dry feeling, not on the tongue, but in the upper part of
the palate. *’lhe mouth feels dry without his being thirsty.—
120, Dry feeling on the inner side of the upper lip and cor-
responding tooth, A good deal of thirst by day, without any
heat. The saliva runs involuntarily out at the corners of the
mouth. *'T coated white.

(Eruption of red rash on the neck.—85. Rough and serap-
ing sensation in the throat. (a.5h.) His throat feels swollen.
and as if he had a violent cold which hinders speech. Burn-
ing, smarting blisters on the anterior edge of the tongue. * The -
mouth is so dry that the tongue sticks to the palate. Dryness
in the mouth without any thirst.—90, Early in the morning dry
feeling in the mouth, mise Violent thirst teenty-two days.
Thirst, especially early in the morning. Violent thirst, day
and night. Great thirst after a meal, for 16 days—95. A good
deal of spitting. Acctnulation of a quantity of saliva in the
mouth, which foams like eet)

Tasre axpv Aprerrre ; * Insipid, flat taste in the mouth,
—125. * Sweetish, flat taste in the mouth. She does not taste
the food ; her mouth is bitter between the meals, Every thing
tastes bitter to him, he is unable to swallow any thing. * Bit-
ter taste in the palate continuing after a meal. * Bad, bitter
taste in the mouth, early in the morning.—130, * Early in the
morning she has a taste in the mouth as of decayed teeth or

dimeat. (a.12h,) 'Tolerably clean tongue, with disgust.
ing taste in the throat, as when persons smell badly from the
mouth ; she has @ taste in her mouth like the smell of spoiled
meat; she has not got this taste while eating. * Putrid smell
fromthe mouth. In the evening he has a taste in his throatas


--- Page 176 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 167

from the smoke of rancid grease. * Loss of appetite without
any bad taste. (a. 3 h.)—135. Canine hunger without any
appetite. Canine hunger until bed-time. He is hungry, and
eats, but without any appetite. He has no appetite for milk ;
but while taking it, he gets an appetite for it, and likes it.
* He desires many things, which he cannot eat—140. Food
smells well to her, but, when beginning to eat, the appetite is
gone. i i for wine. Appetite for coffee.

[Losips oncarege Ses in the mouth. (a. 5d.) Sweetish,

seusting taste in the mouth. IJnsipid, flat taste in the
mouth ; his taste is almost gone—100. Spoiled appetite.
Want of appetite (for ten days). ‘The stomach feels empty ;
he is hungry without having any appetite. Canine hunger
early in the morning, without any appetite. Hunger with loss
of appetite —105. Continued nausea, succeed: canine
hunger (in a few hours), Canine hunger early in the morn-
ing, with thirst and flushes of heat. (a. 30,72 bh.) Violent
hunger, for a fortnight. Violent appetite for six days. Vio-
lent desire for coffee. (a. 5 h.)}

Gastuic Symrroms: * uent risings of mere air, Hic-
cough succeeding the ernetations, without having eaten any
thing previously —145. Hiccough succeeding the eructations,
a quarter of an hour. (a. 48h.) Violent hiceough. Frequent
eructations after a meal, from morning till night. * Erueta-
tions tasting of the ingesta. No eructations afier drinking, but
after taking the least food; however, only air rises, without
any bad taste.—150, (Eructations, with rancid taste in the
mouth, and mucus in the throat.) Stinging pain during e
eructation, (Burning, almost unin eructations, whic
make his mouth rough, and prevent him from tasting the nou-
rishment he Bas After a meal, an astringent, dry taste,
this dryness ng in the anterior part of the mouth, with-
out any thirst ; the lips are dry and chapped. Bitter taste in
the mouth, in the evening after lying down.—115. Eructations
after a meal, finally bitter eructations, Sitter eructations
after a meal. Bitter risings from the msophagus, without
any eructations, with inclination to vomit. Sourish eructa-
tions, sourish water running from his mouth. Inclination to
vomit, early in the morning, after an anxious dream, without
being able to vomit, accompanied by frequent, empty eructa-
tions. —160, Nausea, in the evening before going to bed. He
wakes up after midnight with nausea; he is obliged to yomit,
he bing food. a bile. tation of a sieiael she

| emup. * Regurgitation of the ingesta, without an
ort at soeihing Nausea and inclination to vomit, paid


--- Page 177 ---
168 BRYONIA ALBA.

after eating something which has tasted well to him.—165.
She vomits solid food, but not the liquids. Nausea for halfan
hour, every morning, two hours after rising, with accumula-
tion of water in the mouth, Nausea in the evening, followed
by the discharge of a quantity of water from the mouth
(water-brash).' Nausea, inclination to vomit, without having
eaten any thing. (a, 1h.) Nausea and inclination to vomit,
early in the morning when waking up,—170, * (Hemmatemesis
and lying down.) * Early in the morming at six o'clock,
vomiting of a bitter, musty and putrid liquid, leaving a si

taste in the mouth, Nauseous taste after drinking (in the
afternoon). Vomiting of mucus in the evening. (a. 5h.)
Gulping up of water and mucus, like water-brash (at six
o'clock In the evening); these substances rose into the chest,
with coldness over the whole body.—175. Painful sensation in
the @sophagus, rather in the lower as if it were con-
stricted. Gulping up of mucus from the stomach, out in the
morning. h, especially after a meal.) Headache, a
quarter of an hour after every meal ; it passes off gradually,
but comes on again after the next meal Bloatedness of the
abdomen after every meal.—180. Cutting, as with knives, in
the pit of the stomach, (a. 1h.) Violent pressure in the pit
when b fceser, chaos yrunipacd after supper; lastly, pressure
upon the by and the perineum, which becomes intolera-

; the i red when sitting. (a, 12h.) * Pres-
sure in stomach, ly after having eaten some-
thing, and even during the meal, * Pressure in the stomach
after a meat ; there was a load in the stomach, as of a stone;
this made him ill-humored, Clawing and sure in the
abdomen, in the umbilical region, when ing or walking.
—1S85, Contractive pain in the stomach, some hours after a
meal, Contractive pain in the stomach afier a menl, followed by
cutting inand above the pitof the stomach, eructations, flushes
of heat, nausea and vomiting of the ingesta. (a, 48 h,)

[—110. Tenacious mucus in the fauces, which can be
loosened and hawked up. Frequent, sometimes sourish eruc-
tations after a meal. Nausea, continuing twenty-four hours,
with discharge of a quantity of water from the mouth. (a, 5
m.) Nausea, really whan smoking (it: a man acer
to smoking)... Inclination to vomit (immediately).—115. Sev-
eral attacks of vomiting of a bitter and yellow mucus, Pres-
sure in the stomach after a meal}

[Sromacu: Pressure in the stomach when walking. Pinch-
ing in the pitof the stomach. (a, 12h.) Sensation in the pit af

© Comp, 283.



--- Page 178 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 169

the stomach, as if it were swollen—120, Extremely disagreca-
ble sensation wt the pitof the stomach, as if it were swollen. |

Auvomen : * Hard swelling around the umbilicus, and under
the hypochondria. Sudden ascites; he is unable to breathe,
and bigecenres down. (a. cap reais folds of the
abdomi teguments, in groin.— ensive pon in
region of the liver. (a.8h.) Pain in the abdomen, as if one
would yomit. (a. 5.4.) Pain in both sides of the abdomen, like
pleuritic stitches. Tearing and dmwing in the abdomen, esp
cially during motion ; followed by stitches, especially
stool, and mostly in the evening—196, Violent lancinations in
the abdomen from below w asfar as the stomach (after
drinking a cupef warn in the afiernoon) ; the pain foreed
him to bend double, and disappeared after stool. Painful
writhing (twisting) around the umbilicus, with stitches. Pain
in. the abdomen, with arp te which makes the breathing
difficult ; relieved the pain, The emission of flatulence ,
at yg 3 Hot grunting and howling. Flatulent
colic supper, with pressure in the region of the eacum.
—20), Pain inthe abdomen, as if he had been purged, or as if
hemorrhoids would make their appearance, * Spasmodic pains
in the abdomen after dinner, Grunting in the abdomen, with
sensition as if diarrhan would set in. Horrible colic (in the
forenoon), as if she would have an attack of dysentery, with-
out any stool. Pressure on the umbilicus, os from a button,
when walking in the open air.—205. (Sensation deep in the
abdomen, as of a lump lying there.)

[Heat in the abdomen (and the whole of the internal
body). Pressure and —— in the abdomen. Loud grunt-
ing in the abdomen, a fortnight. Loud rumbling in, the abdo-
men, ially in the evening when in bed, for eighteen days.
—125. Colic, as if he would be attacked with diarrhara, for an
hour anda half, (a. 6 min.)

Sroot: Colic and pinching in the abdomen, and the um-
hilical region, as after a cold, for several days; three days
after the colic, a copious, thin evacuation, Copious, fetid stool,
pe by cutting in the abdomen. Bloated abdomen ;

moves about in his abdomen, colic with continual consti-
tions; he feels as if something were lodged in his abdomen.
lic during stool, as if the parts were constricted, or were
being pinched together with the hand—210. Motion on the
bowels. Two stools a day; in a few days, constipation,'

‘A more effect of in is retention of atoal ¢ its
alternate ei oat Mi ow ma ; when the ther ay map.


--- Page 179 ---
170 BRYONIA ALBA.

Brown, frequent, thin stool in a baby, Frequent evacuations.
(a. 48h.) * The fieces are of a large size, and are therefore
passed with difficulty,—2L5. Diarrhea. (a, rhe! * Diarrhwa,
with previous colic, (a. 44,72h.) Long-lasting burning at
the rectum after hard stool, Soft stool, with a burning sharp
ee in the rectum. Itching, blunt stitches in the rectum from

low upwards, coming on with a jerking sensation,—220,
(Diarrhea at night.)

[Diarrheea. (a, 25h.) Diarrhoea, without any trouble. (a.
24, 30h.) Diarrhea, four days in succession, one attack every
three hours; it came so ily that he was unable to retain
it ; in the twelve succeeding days, the ordinary stool came off
with the same unforeseen necessity, Dinrrhera lasting two
days it made her so weak that she was obliged to keep her

: (e- 3.4)—130. Diarrhea, greatest early in the morning.

iartheea, especially at night; with burning at the anus, at
every evacuation. (a. 7d.) Diarrheea, smelling like rotten
cheese. Thin, bloody stool. (a 24h.) Hard stool, with pro-
trusion of the rectum which soon re-entered of itself; followed
by diarrhea with fermentation in the abdomen.—135. Very
hard stool.]

Uninany Ornoans: Pain in the abdomen, when emitting
the urine. Sensation, when urinating, as if the i pas-
sage were too narrow. He is obl to rise several times for the
a pe of urinating. Violent desire to urinate, also at night,

ithout the bladder being full, he feels such a violent desire
to urinate, that he is scarcely able to retain the urine for one
moment, (a. 12h.) After the urine bas been emitted, the neck of
the bladder contracts ; nevertheless he feels as if some urine
would yet be expelled. He is unable to retain the urine long,
when he feels a desire toemit it; if he does not emit it set g
ately, he feels as if it passed off spontaneously ; (nevertheless,
no urine can be discovered when looking.) During motion some
drops of hot urine ay orges escape from him without his
being aware of it. After urinating, there is a sensation in
the bladder as if he had not emitted the whole of the urine ;
some drops are involuntarily after the emission.—230,
Urgent desire to urinate, and frequent emission of urine, when
walking in the open air. (a. 5h.) Mtehing, burning and sting-
ing pain in the anterior portion of the urethra, between the
acts of micturition. Burning in the urethra. (Aching in the
urethra.) Drawing and tearing in the anterior portion of the
urethra, between the acts of micturition, )
toms correspond, Bryonin is therefore able to cure cons’ which
few remodics, beside Nux v. and Opium can do. atti


--- Page 180 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 171

FM Pa gaol: bein Prva 0 aga) and cut-
revious to the appearance urine. (a. :
3 extra Oncans: A few papier in the evra rae
vy), when sitting. Stin burning itching of |
margin of the prepuce. 2 Tee lane is covered with itching,
psa, 13H es. Swelling of the left half of the labia majora,
by a black, hard pustule of the size and shape of a
pimple, without either pain or inflammation, Bloated abdo-
men ; there is a good deal of movement in it, and a good deal
of pinching, as if the menses would make their appearance,
_ The menses appear in a few hours, sometimes eight
days too soon.'

[Increase of the menstrual flow. The menses appear eight
days before the time.—140, The menses appear a fortnight too
soon. "The menses come three weeks too soon,]

Coin, Catarri: Violent sneezing, early in the morning.
(a. it “ah hy Pres sneezing and Se eaeaily lope ced
ing. (0. uent sneezing, es yw mov)
Pees ines of ie area wonbite ia tea One a A
impure tone of voice, when ing in the open air on
sort of hoarseness, accompanied by inclination to sweat.
* Violent coryza, without any cough. (a. 36h.) Violent coryza,
rather dry. (a. 45h.) Violent coryza, with stinging headache,
asif the contents of the head would issue from the ise Ne
cially when stooping? (a, 70 | Dry h.— 250, * Dry
cough, apparentl pono, Lag the st » preceded by a
creeping and tickling in the pit of the stomach. Cough, from
S continued creeping Fa thir . t, from nagpeh bi Attain one

rows up mucus. cough, especially early in
the hic at with discharge of ydlives from the ‘oan, ke
water-brash.’ Nausea excites his cough. * Vomiting of the
ingesta during a —255, * Long-continued stitch, deep in
the left hemisphere of the brain, when Log rg * Dry cough
with retching : a few , violent fits In the upper part
of the trachea, which feels as if it were lined with a dry, hard
mucus; the cough is excited even by the smoke of tobacco.
* Violent cough, early in the morning when in bed, continuing
a quarter of an hour, and ioning the expectoration of a
quantity of mucus, His chest is affected early in the morning ;
his chest feels as if it were lined with mucus, which cannot
loosened easily, * Scraping and painful cough with retching,

‘This in a primary effeet: Bryonia thorefo’ be
em sd duh mtasun donlect haaoetenetie tacinke
omp, 31, 32. *Comp. 167


--- Page 181 ---
172 BRYONIA ALBA.

asif caused b ss Ay and dryness of the laryax.—260,
ca. th compa up cana aMe NO (EB) to
chea. He coughs up coagu » (a 3h. ©
hawks up yellow mucus from the fauces. * Stitches in the
throat when coughing: * Stitches in the region of the last rib
when coughing. . Stitches in the sternum when conghing ;
he is o to hold his chest with the hand ; the stitches are
likewise felt when the parts.' ‘T'wo attacks of sneezing
during the cough. ing during the cough, without nau-
sea. Soreness in the pit of the stomach i eb 3 The
whole head is affected when coughing, Pressure in the hea
a cn ety ook esenais! basienion mortocyged' ag 7

sping for air, quick, s i irations, as 1 i

pa eo fall breath. and was not able to cough on that
account; a kind of suffocative fit, which is: followed
by cough, especially after midnight.

[* Rough and hoarse voice. (a.4h.) Hoarseness, t “one
days. Fluent coryza, for eight days—\45. Violent fluent
coryza, which abliged hin to talk through the nose, constantly
accompanied by chilliness, for cight days. (a. 45 bh.) Violent
coryza, with pain in the forehead. pr nor eli seoms as if
ee. mucus were in th ae ; after some
retching he experionces a sore andaching pain in that organ,
which increases when talking or is tobacco.
entering the warm roam, coming from the cold air,a sensa-
tion in the trachea as if it contained smoke ; this obliges
him tovough ; Me, oe if he could not breathe air enough.
a. 2 h.)—150. Tenacious mucus in the trachea which

loose only after much coughing. * Cough with
expectoration (onimedintsty), Cough with tion, in
the forenoon, four days in succession. (a. 34 h.)

Crest: Pressure in the pit of the stomach, which oppresses
her chest. An excessive warmth in the region of the pit of the
chest shortens her breath, with a kind of aching. ces
pain in the right half of the chest. (a. 8 h.)—275. Iniped
respiration. * breathing is shorter, the expirations are
more hurried, * Asthma, (a. 1h.) * Attack of pleurisy and
pe Sawer the chest for twelve hours. * Oppression of the
chest: she felt a want of taking a deep inspiration (as if her
chest were stopped up and she could not egos }; when
attempting to take a deep inspiration, she felta pain in the
chest, as if something were expanded which would not admit
of ex . Anxioust in the morning, appa-
f expansion —280. Anxiousness, early in the ing, appa

+ Comp. 333, 351, 401.


--- Page 182 ---
BRYONIA ALBA. 173

tently from the abdomen, as if he had been purged, and as if
the breathing were too short. * Quick, anxious, almost impos-
sible breathing, owing to stitches in the chest, first behind the
schpulm, afterwards behind the muscles of the chest, impeding
respiration, and obliging one to sit ps a ae stitches in
the vertex, Pressure over the whole (a. 24h.) Pres-
Peta egy yt Sapo ern Serpent
imagines she is unable to walk in the open air, without feeling
a pain in that Aching im the middle of the sternum,
also when brea’ , the feet being icy cold —285. Pressure
upon the chest, as if it were oppressed by mucus, with stitches
in the sternum when taking an inspiration ; this pressure
appeared to decrease by eating, Heaviness in the chest, aud
heaviness in the body, disappearing aftera meal. “Stitches in
pie pay ach water teeoic” jh aerin Sicha ipo Sie
on with a jerking sensation, and disappearing m the open air.
* During an inspiration, stiteh from the upper part of the chest,
po the chest to the seapulm, When taking an inspiration,
the ribs, towards the back, are affected with a tensive pain,
which is changed to a dull stitch when taking o still deeper
inspiration, expeciaDy behind the scapule, and especially

when stooping * At six o'clock in the ing, stitches
in the chest, with op ion. Momen sti in the
left clavicle, followed be a simple pain. turning to

the other side, in the bed, he felt a stitch in that side upon
which he did not rest, Stitches and pulsative throbbings in
the lower partof the right half of the chest, Stitching pressing
in the chest, from outwards.—295, At the least inspim-
tion, a lancination, such as is felt in ulcers, in a small spot
below the clavicle; the duration of the lancination corresponds
to that of the inspiration; the small spot is painful like an
ulcer, even when touching it, still more when raising the right
arm, early in the morning. (a. 24h.) Pain in the xiphoid car-
tilage, in the evening; when touched, it feels as if it were eo-
chymosed, Pain over the whole chest, with oppression which
seek). hea = reer “eles sod cep iea
o as rose up, i
one of both breath and Compressive griping in the
chest, near Me pocuina-o00. Pe in ape eg tert ie
the pit of the stomach, clawing, greatest when on a chair,
and stoop ing, and when lying on one side in the (Stretch-
ing, extending across the chest from the short ribs.) ‘Tension in
the chest, when walking. Painful stiffness of the muscles on
the right side of the nape of the neck towards the shoulder,
when moving the head. Pain in the nape of the neck, at its


--- Page 183 ---
174 BRYONIA ALBA,

juncture with the occiput ; the pain is a painful weakness, as if
the head were too weak,

gg of the heart, several days in succession. (a.
12d.) * Heat in the chest —155, * Heat in the chest and face,
Sensation as if every thing were loose in the chest and fell
down into the abdomen. Cla pressure behind the ster-
num, most violent when taking an inspiration or expiration. (a.
5d.) Considerable swelling of the external chest in front,
Single, soft stitches in an indurated 1 ye sea to the sen-
sation created electric sparks; after this, every trace of
induration had disappeared. (a. 5 h.j—160, Pricking pain
belne the right ni Srom within outwards ; in the cavity
of the chest, these prickings are only felt during an expira-
tion. F

ack: Pain in the nape of the neck, asaftera cold. Pres-
sure between both seapulee and on the opposite side of the
chest, in front, when sitting ; the pressure went off by walking.
Spasmodic pain between the scapule, almost resembling a
~axraganigs ‘Transversely contractive pain over the whole
back, as if he were tied fast with ribbons, the pain being almost
cramp-like (from four o'clock in the afternoon to eight o'clock
in the evening). (a. 48h.) Drawing, down along the back,
when sitting, going off by motion.—310, Painfully stinging
eos g on both sides of the spine, when sitting, especially early
the morning and evening. Pain, as from bruises, in the
small of the back, when sitting, worst when lying down, not
much felt during motion. He is unable to stoop on account of
a pain in the back and the lumbar vertebre ; it is a sort of
ara is felt more when standing than when sitting, but
not when lying down.

Stitches in the lumbar vertebne. Stitching pain in the

of the back and back, at night, for six hours. (a. 70h.)

Pains in the small of the back, making the walking very diffi-

pin reine in the back.—165, Burning below and between
seapule.

Suprenion Exraremetres: A few stitches in the hip, as
jie es aa cone pty om the pit of the
axilla to i » (Twitehings i in the del-
toid muscle.) Sensation, as if a thread ome heli drawn
through the humeri and radii down to the of the fingers.
Pressure on both humeri, which prevents him from falli
asleep in the evening. Nervous tearing from above down
in the interior of the arms. Sweat in the axilla.—320, Pain
as from a sprain, in the region of the acromium process, when
raising the arms. (a.3h.) Swelling of the right humerus,


--- Page 184 ---
BRYONIA ALBA, 175

down to the elbow. (Violent stinging and tingling in the left
arm.) Stinging in the region of the olecranon process of the
ulna, with drawing in the tendons down to the hand; when
bending the elbow, the stinging becomes worse. (‘Tingling in
the hand, as if it had gone to sleep.) Pain in the ine t's
as from contusion or a sprain, at every motion, (a. h.
Fine stinging in the wrist-joint, when the hand gets warm
when ove is at rest; it does not go off by motion, Inflamma-
tion of the dorsum of the hand, with a burning pain, about
midnight. Hot feeling in the palms of the hands and the
fore-arms; early in the morning she has to uncover them ;
in a few hours they feel cold. The palm of the hand feels
pithy and numb,' . (The little fingers of both hands have

to sleep, as far as the wrist.) Sense of paralysis in the

ts, (Pain in the ball of the thumb, resembling stitches
and cramp.) Somewhat hot, pale swelling of the last joint of
the little finger ; stitches in that joint when er tye the finger
and pressing upon it A pimple between the mght thumb
and index-finger, which, when touched, causes a stinging pain,
or stitches such as are felt in a wound.—335. Pain in the root
of the little finger, as if there were pus in it.

[Aching and peoert on the top Wi the right shoulder,
increasing in violence when touching the parts ; dull stitches
in that part, when taking a deep inspiration ; they extend
from before backwards, as far as the shoulder-joint. (a. 10
h.) Dull stitch across the shoulder, in the direction of the
arm. A sort of stitches in the upper arm, especially when
raising it. Swelling of the right elbow-joint, with stitches —
170. * Swelling of the elbow-joint, extending a little beyond
the joint above and below, as far as the middle of the upper
and lower arm, with swelling of the Fhe for hours.
Tearing pain in the inner surface of fore-arm, from the
net to the wrist-} — (a. 6 d.) Pei rash-like eruption on

e upper surface of the fore-arms. Stitching pains in the wrist-
joints, with heaviness of the joints, He is unable to
nr pce with his hands.—175. Trembling and dis-
tended veins of the hands. Jerking tearing in the joints of the
meta bones and the phalanges, or shortly after in the
joints of the last phalanges, Involuntary twitchings of the
fingers of both hands, during motion. Stinging pains in the
fingers when writing.

Invention Exrremrties: Pain as from bruises in the
small of the back and the thighs. Cramp-like pain in the

' Comp. 377. * Comp. 295, 351, 402.


--- Page 185 ---
176 BRYONIA ALBA.

small of the back, when sitting or lying ; it comes and foes
with a jerking sensi When lying on the small of the
back it is painful, as if it were bruised. Pain in the hip-joint,
when lying down or sitting ; it comes and goes like jerks or
pushes, and decreases when walking. —340. * When stooping
while standing, lancinating darting pain from the hip joint to
the face. Pain in the trochanter, stitch in making a
which causes one to start; throbbing in the trochanter when
at rest; the po feels very painful when touched.’ Unsteadi-
ness of the thighs and legs, and vacillation when going down
stairs, (a, 20h.) Drawing in the thighs as if the monses
would make their o: nee, Eurly in the morning the
thigh foels rigid, as if it were affected with cramp—345. Stitch
in the upper and anterior of the thigh. Pain as from
bruises in the middle of the thighs; when sitting, he feels a
beating in that spot as with a hammer. Cramp in the knee
anil the sole of the foot, when sitting, and in the night, when
ee pore Pain when going down stairs, as if the patella
would treak. Fuintishness. Weakness of the feet, when
going up stairs.—350), * Tensive, painful stiffness of the knees.
ule below the knee, which feels sore only when touched,
and then becomes stinging. A tearing and burning in the right
knee. ‘The patelle ache, as if they had been knocked loose.
An itching inthe bend of the knee as when a sore is healing,
that part being covered with sweat during the night.—355.
Violent drawing pain in the leg, ally the calf, for one
hour, with subsequentsweat. (a.44.) Drawing pain in the
tibine. bn on upon the legs, from which a humor oozes
rrehaliingr tats Mg’at ihe ja ertiig by doy, xs if cone
ngs in the leg at night; a ay, as if ea
by an electric stroke. . *Sudden swelling of the legs.
ramp in the left calf early in the a (a. 12h.) Cramp
in the feet, in the dorsum of the foot and in the heel, in the
night when lying in bed. (a. 6h.) Cramp in the ealf (con-
tractive tightness) at night, going off by motion, * Hot »xwell-
ing of the foot. (a. 8h. . Hot swelling of the bend of
the foot, with a pain as from brujses when stretching the foot ;
tensive sensation of the foot when treading ; when touching it,
one experiences a pain from subcutaneous ulceration, or as if
there were . (White postales on the foot; they
caused a pain like an ulcer, the foot became red, and he was
unable to walk from pain.) ‘The swelling of the foot is aceom-
panied by tearing in the tibiw, and heaviness in the arms. * In

* Comp. 401, 402.



--- Page 186 ---
the a sort of dull stitches in succession one after

in Charthneniin when ie tent dior patie aacin chee valle
when H *

Pain on icone tches

foot. Corns are painful like @ sore, even when merely touched
by the cover of the bed. Lancinating pain in the ball of the
ight too, increasing when eras decreasing when ing.
Stitches in the balls of the toes of both feet, towards evening ;
he had to wits tet ose The corn, which had been pain-
less heretofore, was with « burning aot eee

only when slightly touched ; the ceased ely

when the part was strong! pressed upon—385. Pain in the

tl of the hits i ee re 180. Itching of the
u al in the hips.—

hips and thighs. a. 43 by) ‘Tearing pain in the right thigh

whi moving aon tireat psslonie. of the harks. is

searcely able to go up stairs ; the weakness is felt lesx when
ging dove stare “te ths vail eel when go-
ng up or down the stairs. (a.2d.) Great weakness of the thighs ;
it miay even be felt when sitting. (a. 8 h.j—185, * Stitches in
the knees when . Fine, stitches in the bends
of the knees, oul motion, Dry eruption near and
bends of the knwes, itching in theevening and red,
and causing a smarting pain being scratched. Weak-
ness, especially in the joi Weakness, especially in the



--- Page 187 ---
178 BRYONIA ALBA.

same region, when at rest, for many days. (a, 12 h.).
ing, without any redness, of the lower half the legs,
the feet, which are not swollen,—195. Lancinating
from the feet to the bends of the knees, less when at rest
cies ee Pressure on the inner border of the left
(a. 1h.) Tearing in dorsum of the right foot, the
night, Stitches in the Such violent stitches in the
of both feet, that sk unable to tread upon the
tension in the tarsal joints; nor was she able to lie dow
owing to the tension ect tbaee in ews parts,—200, Single
stitches in the toes,

Gexena. Symrroms: * Pain as from bruises of the
upper and lowet limbs, even when lying down, greater
when sitting than wheo walking; when lying down he had
to change the position of his limbs constantly on account of this
pain ; pape matter what position he took, he always’ felt as
though he would be more comfortable by changing it, * Every
ag the red aches when touching it, as Lh site it were

or as if there were ek mp sl ule especial
in the pit of the stomach, early in the morning. ar the limbs
feel bruised and poraly zed in the evening, as if he had been
ying on hard couch, (a. ah) *A pai draw to and
in the affected part. * Nervous, drawing ache in the peri-
osteurn of all the anaes asin the beginning of fever and ague,
pits seo forenoon, (a. 24 hy Pressing in the whole body,
ially on the Neat * Violent drawing through all the
fiinbe. He scr hear keeping Me affected limb still; he
moves it to and Rblgetrss twitching in arms and feet, by
day.—395, * When the pain ago Daeg put vembls, and
Suite

the countennnes becomes cold. by the. resco tay

sili

i Hun

=

Prickings over the whole bod: y: A sligh whter)
race a sudden aed ben etines tehing) b er re over a eee
, us ifhe th nettles, or as if hada
bes a ae gh nth be seen on the skin; after.
wards he felt this burn in roerels Soak ag SEK os ben
heated, itching and continued stitches in
different parts, in the evening after lying down, in be (a, 2 h,)
400, Stitehes in the j when moving or touching them:
Stitches in the part, which made her start. Stitches

in the affected n pressing tpn pon it, pcre
ibe aos th a bey) pena gine

espe pots na ae the in the nae
Tow, enil x8 Gnoloceatinn of tha raton, alee
on the knee, ray snore than In bend of the. el
405, Eruption of on the arms, on the fore part of the


--- Page 188 ---
chest, and above the the evening, it
and bu sapere ar prea
evcting eens cope aed } ng cli . Pimples make their

st ee » :
hole Seas otanee va line aera 3

so violently that quo like to serateh

In the eve itehing about
an wpiaes “Tn the evening pg and stall, red,
elevated pimples, causing burning pain ; after the pimples
had made their Wy Biden wcareser yrs Smmgesy ing
pr any any ling asleep, during the day or in the eve-
ning, in different places of the soft parts of the body; lem
searching, ( yp itching and burning stitches—410, ‘Titil-
lation (by day) on the arms, hands and feet, with rash-like
pimples. Red, round of the size of lentils, and larger
ones on the arms, without sensation ; they do not disa
by pressing pon them, Red, small spots on the skin
arms and fot, painful as if they had boon caused by nettles
they diss for ments wh. rein up en, A
sore, painless place begins t burn violently. recap. x
in yee uleer—515, The iehor from the ulcer wig

-

Hi

the pol (u er) ea in the morning a raaie:
increases when he stands ; it abates when sitting, and p-
pears when taki moderate exercise. ‘lhrobbing, somewhat

(Pain allover the body, as if the flesh, were loos, for six
we days. * Yeliowness of tho skin of the whole body, also
of the (a. 12d.) * Red, elevated, rash-like eruption over
the whole pe ee in maces te ca in the baby
the eruption made sat the end of two days, in
gen yee on the abvlouen and
sig ai tn ey and on the fo
and burning

FREE
=
‘€
SEE
>
or
Fe
a
rip
a8

maces sie
w ;w seca weary et
along.—420. When walking eal hy rising

a cE vomeatince une the


--- Page 189 ---
180 BRYONIA ALBA.

parts of the body, as if all the muscles had lost their power;
she felt relieved when continuing to walk. When wa in
the open air, she feels weakest. He feels qualmish, w
walking in the open air; his lower limbs feel so faint and his
head is so weak, that he imagined he would fall; od ane
pschalbsiesecrt oe ee sa centre ee ead ;
this symptom disappeared in the room, but appeared again in
the ane When walking ip the open’air, she did not feel
tired; hut when entering the room, she felt so tired that she
was obliged either to sit or to lie down. Her strength disa)
on making the least effort.—426. Heaviness and weak-
ness in all the limbs; she is scareely able to move her foet
when walking, from mere heaviness, The feet feel weary as
if she had been running long, His feet feel heavy as o hun-
dred weight afier rising from a seat. * Faintness. He feels
very faint when sitting, less so when walking.—430. He ima-
nes he feels better when walking. Inthe morning he finds
difficult to rise; he would like to remain in the bed, although
he does not feel tired. When waking from sleep, he feels very
faint, Shortly after waking from the siesta, all the symptoms
tire more distinct and intense; he is ent of humor.
General depression of strength, Weakness of the lower
othigi bin to sit down. Faint, lazy, and drowsy,]
Sueer: . In one night he slee until morning,
and remains drowsy the whole day ; the next t, his sleep
uneasy, and the day afier he remains wide awake the whole
= eben io tie tod bed, he feels fhinting, with cold sweat
rumbling in y. Disposed to yawn, frequent yawn-
ihg the whole day, * Great drowsiness by day, nud great
inclination to ke a nap after dinner; when waking from it,
all her limbs had gone to sleep, A good deal of drowsiness by
day, when be is alone.—440, Her hands and feet toss about in
the night, until one o'clock, as if she felt anxious; she lies ap-
parently without her senses, with cold sweat on her forehead
we paws afterwards she see yates resegant ed in his
morning ; every part © y upon which he is
resting, aches, The blood | is agitated at aces tie falls a:
late and does not sleep sfundly. She tosses about in her t
until one o'clock at night; she is unable to fall asleep on ac-
count of a feeling of heat and anxiety; nevertheless she does
pepe pg a Ss “ "mga orp

one
thirst.—445, i after lying down, in the evening
when in bed, feeling of mip 05.8 a ae


--- Page 190 ---
wit wl cai pacing he, och

i praca css oie sera eat pry. ideas that crowd
upon him; this tion disuppears in venient’ 3 , without

hie p perceiving any flatulence. *S cap owing
rnaonnsge Sct he tosses ia his bed. For sev-
pe cus in suecession he is unable to sleep, from heat; the
coverof the bed is too hot for him; when uncovering
he feels too cool, but without any thirst and almost without
sweat. He was unable to fall p; he was ~iomeae
warmth and agitation of the blood until midnight, He is una-
ble to fall asleep before two o’cloek at night; he has to turn to
and fro in his bed like a child whose has been disturbed
he is yet very et & after waking.—4150, She does not
asleep till four o'clock in the morning, and then dreams about
ons pormons. *'The child is unable to fall asleep in the eve-
; he leaves the bedagain. Si ness before midnight.
Het soshle tn fall acleoy bebe ht, owing to pre
thrills of shuddering over dhe foot or arm; afterwards a little
sweat. She wakes in the evening, when in bed, after a short
sleep; sensation in the pit of the stomach, as if the parts in
that region were twisted around something; she*has qualms of
sickness, threatens to omigere aire hinor tages up—455. Moan-
ing when asleep, at three o'clock in the morning. She starts
in the eveni , previons to fallin Startings every eve-
ning, when jing asleep, Startings whi which wake
him. He starts up from an anxious drea: howls. — 460.
When waking he cannot get rid of his ro he continues
dreaming, even while awake. She wakes every hour in the
night, and recollects the dream she has had; when falli
i se has another dream, whichis jstas vv and
wie recollects just as clearly when awake, Restless at
t; anxious dreams at three o'clock; she utters criesawhen
p. Anxiousdreams. He dreams, while awake, that some
ene wants to break the windows.465. Dreams full of dis-
pute and vexatious things. Vivid dreams the whole night
about attending to his business in a scrupulous and correct
manner. Hedreams of his household affairs. * While dream-
ing she rises from her bed, at night, and goes to the door, as if
buee would go out: (While he moves his mouth as-if he
}—470. He is delirious when waked from his
prone Nightly delirium. Delirium, at day-break, about busi-
ness which he has to attend to; the delirium abates when the


--- Page 191 ---
182 BRYONIA ALBA.
in commences. At ten o'clock, before midnight, the ue
being hot and covered with sweat (without any ¢ ) he
tormented by « delirious fancy full of terrific images, such as:
that soldiers are cutting him down; that hewas on the point of
escaping from them ; (the delirium abated by uncovering him-
self and getting cool). Towards evening, while asleep, she
drew her mouth to and fro, opened her eyes, distorted them,
a st delirium, os she —_ been wide awake} she
spo y, but hastily, as imagined theré were
pte tA her besides those cast open and free
glances around ; eas with children who were not present,
and wanted to tt ome.—475, One wakes early in the night.
He only sleeps before midnight, not afterwards ; remains wide
awake; feels great weariness when lying down, which increases
in the legs rising, but aflerwards passes off soon. Sleep
does not refresh him; he feels quite tired early in the mornit
when waking up; the lassitode disappears when rising a
dressing himeoll She sl the w day, with dry, te
heat, without eating or drinking, with twitehings in the taee ;
she has six involuntary passages, the stools being brown and
motte Pree lexus before d
Ww. nentyawning, Constant yawnt ore dinner,
with much thirst. Stretching of the lizabe (int the afternoon.)
siness inimediately after dinner. Great drowsiness, also
day, for several days in succession. —215, * Continual ineli-
nation to sleep, for three days. So sleepy, that he would like
‘to sleep the whole day, for thirteen dnys m succession. Uneasy
sleep with confused dreams; he tosses from side to side. Un-
easy sleep, full of ideas, Somuambulism.—220, Involuntary
stools, at night, wheh asleep. |
Preven: Shuddering in the afternoon ; afterwards heat with
chilliness, the chilliness being on the chest and arms, (arms and
esr — however, panera! sautewend heat - the head,
wi tive pains in the tem ycreasiog in the evening ;
6 thier ether daria tha siecshdoricig, thet or the chilli-
ness.—480. The inside BA his head feels chilly and dreary
after the siesta. He is obliged to drink several times at night.
(a. 30 h.) Headache, early in the morning, when oat
Nera ib ner cin and feet cer dead and num
at night, icy cold ; cannot t warm; they go to slee
485. He feels a coldness in his waste iit side, * Chilliness
about the arms. *Chilliness all over, whole of the first
day. Chilliness over the whole skin, Chilliness towards eve-
ning —190, * Chilliness in the bed, inthe evening when |
down. * Chilliness in the evening, previous to going to


--- Page 192 ---
:
=
:
zB

A deal of shuddering. Chilliness in the open-air,
decks the ete After returning from a walk in the open air,
she is attacked with chilliness in the sooth; iy dil ot ee

chilly in the open air.—495, bie Maris in the m
sudden, theat. (a.+h,) Heat in the external
the evening ; afterwards sh iz and chills in the
limbs: (a.4b.) Fever: | down, chilliness, yawning,
sen ; afte: sweat without any thirst, from ten o'clock
the evening until ten o'clock in the morning, Fever: in
forenoon, heat (with thirst ;) ina few hours (in the afternoon)
chilliness: without thirst, with redness of face and con-
cealed headache. * She is attacked with a sudden, dry heat
at every motion or noise.—500, Frequent attacks of heat of the
lower limbs ; she felt as if she ste into hot water. Hat,
red cheeks in the evening, and thrills of shuddering all over,
with goose-skin and thirst. ‘Thirst (a. 1 h,) followed by absence
of all thirst, with cold handsand feet. (a.4h.) Her throat be-
comes y in the evening, and she feels thirsty. Violent
thirst.—505. Violent ¢ is able and compelled to drink
much at one time, and drinking does not incommode her, Great
thirst, carly in the morning, when rising. ‘The thirst increases
fm drinking beer. * Internal heat with unquenchable thirst.
excessive warmth in the pit of the stomach gives her a
deal of thirst (the hed hiss of the throat does not come
it.) 510. * Heat out any thirst, * Heat abott the
body, without any thirst. * Several attacks of heat o
and over, early in the ing. * heat atnight. *
in tbe morning the inside of his head feels hot; the front of
his feels warm,—515. * Hoat in the head in the forenoon ;
feeling os if the contents of the head wonld issue from the
forehead. Heat in the faee towards ae A red, round,
hot pi the cheek, ou the zygoma, Great internal warmth ;
the in the veins is burnmg hot, Red urine —$20. * He
sweats easily, when exerting himself a little, also at night,
When walking in the open air, he sweats all over his body,
Warm sweat in the palms of the hands, Sweat towards morn.
ing, especially on the feet. * Morning-sweat.—825. * Some
sweat towards morning, after waking. r-swelling, profuse
sweat during a sound night-sleep. At three o'clock in the
night he is attacked with thirst previous to sweat; aflerwards
sweat of a sweetish-sour smell and four hours’ duration, previ-
ous to the termination of which he was attacked with an aching
and drawing pain in the head, whieh Jeft a dreary and m
died sensation in the head afterrising. He suddenly wakes at
throe o'clock in the night and perspires slightly ; this perspira-

tt


--- Page 193 ---
184 {BRYONIA ALBA.

tion lasts until morning, d which the recumbent
is the most agreeable to him ; Pope waleipeds the
yy cerpesey aly bene, Sep RAO any pet (a.
8h.) t perspiration in the evening till
he sleeps only from twelve till three o'clock. ned
[Chilliness in the open air, Violent gos een tiging
rig dou the whole body, as in fever and
har $0 ua Wu, With a stitching in the left si eee
hip, as if an abscess would form in that part, without any thirst
or subsequent heat.. (a. 23h.) Violent thirst, he had to drink
a good deal of cold liquid, with internal heat, without feeling
hot to the tuck on the outside. Great thirst—225,
psc indeagvk external heat, Feeling of heat in the face, with
hoa gee ee of heat. Bens in the
omen.) Anxions sweat, hindering
tay esl ile sweats when apace He sweats at the slight-
pier Violent sweat of the whole poy are of the head,
en lying in bed. Sweat, which, when being wiped off, felt
lice oll Sri and i. Violent, warm sweat over the whole
body, even the sy le tg With sweat.—235. Violent
night-sweat. pt three o' the morning, pel nights
7 grees re proms ;—530, * Apprehensions, doubts. (a. 18
onaL Sym
=) thal the the whole body, it opee’ hi him to under-
icvplee yp. ar time ; he had no restany where. * Irrita-
ty fea, fear, aud pauiiy to be Fc out of
nrg otter a2 Se bi pepo
ill- humored, and onde umored
gined she would not get through ik soe work ; took hold if the
wrong piece; inclined to change pieces all the time ; afterwards
a presi ache inthe foro She inclines to undertake too

st

oh ee oe as at the same pat (a. 20
h. jolent discouragement, not, to think, VESS1O
0 the intellectual faculties, 7

[* Delirious talk about business, foran hour. (a.2h.) He
attempted several times to esenpe from his bed. rehonsive
ane of mind ; he dreads the Suture.—2M0, * tion ; five

tion of spirits, A ood deal of
sity fora day and a A ~ ag 8
pet Peevish ; every thing puts him out of humor,]

*
.


--- Page 194 ---
- CAMPHOR,

(The nlecholic solution of the substance of the camphora
wiih resemblon 8 hardened ethereal oil, and has almoat the ebape of

———

I no not look upon the list of which are known
of Campror, as complete ; I Soumhark Taaceky 8 beginning of
such a list, which may be completed hereafter, :
‘This medicine has always been given at random in
doses, so that its true action could never be known, for
additional reason, that it has always been employed in combi-
aalinae aged a itn; Tie patieroote nme
tumultuous raging , e ic symptoms
which bere bes observed by Alexander are very fow and

: neral. , 4

‘The action of this substance on the heal boat is

extremely problematic and difficult to define, reason,
that the jelpes action of Camenona alternates too sudden!
and is too y confounded with the reaction of the vi
principle, which makes it difficult to distinguish between this
reaction and the secondary effects of Campnon.

Some of the results of the action of Campron are just
lematic and astonishing as that action itself. It neutral-
the effects of a variety of vegetable medicines (even of

Canruartpes and a number of mineral and metallic medi-
cines) and must therefore have a sort of general pathological
action which we shall perhaps never be able or even permitted
to designate by a general term, lest we should stumble into the
oo ows, shige gence dreams itd around pte
place n wledge ¢ senses; W
we grope in re dak instead of being tened by experi-
efice, and where, in spite of our a: at penetrating into
the inmost constitution of things, which little minds are so
prone to boast of, we reap nothing but pernicious error and
self-delusion as the fruit of such By De: physical speculations, .
Lknow from experience that Campror removes the violent
effects of a number of medicines which had either been impro-
perly selected or administered in too large doses; in all such

See Will. Alexander's experiments


--- Page 195 ---
186 CAMPHOR.

cases it acts as a palliative, as an antipathie to the primary
action of those drugs, For purposes of palliation it ought to
be given frequently and in small doses, every five or fifieen,
or, if the be very imminent, every two or three minutes,
mixing one drop of an alcoholic dilution (one eighth of a grain)
with a quarter of an ounce of water by shaking these ingre-
dients together, or directing the patient to smell of a solution of
Camruor every three, four, six, ten or fifteen minutes,

One grain of Campror (dissolved in eight drops of alcohol
unites with 400 grains of tepid water, and may be dissol
perfectly by means of rioncirg ber tae Bed the doctrine con-
tained in almost every Materia Medica,

According to experience, Camrnor is no antidote
against the violent effects of lonarta.
change of to the short duration mete & on oh amd

its symptoms, it cannot, ont
asa Sanadial eesti in the treatment of oie ic disenton:

Camrror, when applied to the skin, producing a kind of
erysipelutous inflammation, it may be applied externally to
similarly ae es provided the erysipelas, irradiating
over the skin and disappearing momentarily on pressure, is a
mere external symptom of a sudden int disease, the other
symptoms of which correspond to those of Camrron.

In the Siberian influenza, when it appears amongst us at
the time when the hot weather has already set in, Camrimon
may be used as a palliative; but it is an excellent palliative
on sccount of the disease having a short duration, and ought
to be given in frequent and lig arethold increased doses in
water, as taught above. In this way Camrnon does not
shorten the course of the disease, but deprives it of its danger
and diminishes its interisity until it reaches its termination.
One dose of Nux v. one pellet of the 30th potence, when

omc@opathically indicated, frequently cures the di in a
couple of hours, .
= Ovrrum hose antidote to pape spre On dear hand,
AmPHOR is a great preserver of life in cases of poisoni
Orrum ; the effects of these two substances: macarslize ©
. tis astonishing that Camrnon and Ortum should be
— sree. ued in the same prescription by physicians of the

FROM NOACK AND TRINKS,

Camenon is, next to Bromine, tho most volatile remedial
agent, and is remarkable for the rapidity with which its effects


--- Page 196 ---
CAMPHOR, 187

1 oll Mei me ade 2 succeeded b
essay, B te copsciaily enteble rin the “he nebo
the nerwous system is diminished or

muscular fibre is affected with paralytic weakness, pore sie
irritability of the organixm, and especially that of the capil-
laries is od even to the degree of ase ms rei
It is expecially suitable to lax, bloated, and

matic-catarrhal constitutions, and to the 1 erhopmnnpi fa mel-
ancholy temperament ; also, = edietdutte with cold extremi-
ties, slaw respiration ‘and ‘agpereg who are affected
with calender, who are eden and whose body
and mind have Shes sm protr illness, CamPpnor
restores the power of the or, satin to be influenced by other
medicinal suhaeanls al: ought ta be replaced by other
suitable remedial age agents as soon as the vital energies have
been restored. sain cosh — the aes neipal cepa a number

isa

of vegetable. medicinal in many
diseases, and has Salk cc clo too caro iio. By boaeeas hie
merino ft hus been advan ed in the fol-
wing atlections: Catarrhal a —Drop-
sical affe aacasen peers and ra caters re shart
both acute and chronic iflammations (with Rirus.

Cura, Ansen.) eapecia when of a rheumatic and erysip-
elatous character, with if weak, fan pulse, and shrivelled
flaccid skin. Jt may be used as a preventive of a number.
of severe diseases, especially catarrhal, in the W prea
stage, when a general uncomfortableness and chilliness
announce the approach of a feverish condition.—Fevers cha-
racterized by postponing crises, and when the status nervosus
either threatens to set in, or has already set in.— Congestive
recrudescences, arterial erethism, bleeding at the nose, ete.,
in the eters of of convalescence of nervous and typhous fevers,
(also V —Asthenic gets nervous fevers, when the
reactive powers of the organism are entirely prostrate, when
the head i ares ocr x ure of the skin
iameniay: when the strength of been exhausted
he a long violent fever ; whe Ge Sn temperature of the body
has given place to a general coldness with viscid, tenacious
sweat; when the cheeks are flushed, the patients are in con-
stant. deli ae st Paso Bowe the pulse, is almost
peer with rheumatic pleurisy and
ane an inferior degree of heat,
(whee eben heat is fs se give Ruvs.,) painless, involuntary
micturition, spasms in the chest and abdomen ; in the third
stage, Cameron may be given after sudden spasmns when pre-
~


--- Page 197 ---
168 CAMPHOR.

viously removed by Bryonta, (also Prose.) —Soporous inter
wlenod fovecs with long chills —Asiatic jithe oh
stage, with viscid sweat; according to Lobethal, Camrion
aspecific in the Asiatic cholera, as long as the has a
natural color, even if the temperature of the body should be
ever so low ; in the stage of asphyxia he recommends Canpo
veo. and Secare cornurum, with the frequent use of ice-pills.
—Cutaneous diseases with fever, with great internal anguish
and oppression of the patients, when an increased appearance
of the exanthema may be apprehended, especially in -miliaria
(in this affection Campnor rivals Ans.)}—Perpura senilis, when
it threatens to pass over into Gangrena senilis, especially on
the toes—Mamia, the chief symptom being indifference, with
subdued, sluggish pulse and contracted pupils, the testicles
being sometimes drawn up.—Delirium tremens.—Stroke of the
sun.— Headache, ton by the feet getting wet, by catch-
ing i yi by a n change of temperature, with
caturrhal affection of the organs of ration; throbbing, and
throbbing headache, especially in e Renae oa 8 arp
organs being affected sympathetically ; rought on
by abuse of Cuamomtoa and cea aheniereurtat
plyalism.—Diarrhen, (especially when cholera is epidemic)
th colicky pains, lly when on by cold, with
frequent chilliness or a sensation as if cold air passed through
the uncovered parts ; great anguish and intermitting stool —
Spastic and inflammatory irritation the urinary and
sexual organs, especially when caused by Canraanrpes;
(according to Ruckert, Camrnon ought never to be employed
in diseases characterized by excessive irritation of the sexual
organs and frequent emission of semen; he recommends the
Stnuaunenarse egpsepe er a is wantin “ee
ital organs are »)—Influenza—V iolent
sms of the chest, brought on by violent emotions, with
pleuritic stitches, sighing, moaning, and the fear of death ;
Ppa Se brought on by inhalation of the vapours of
R — Pot Coprer.—Pneumonia during the pre of
epidemic us.

Awrinores: Spire. srrr. pune.—Coffee and alcohol
increase the effects of Campnon.—-Campnor is aaid to increase
the action of Nrrnem.—Camrnonr is antidotic to a number of
vegetable drugs, jally such as have a drastic effect and
cause vomiting diss paleness of countenance, cold-
ness of the extremities and loss of consciousness.

_——— o


--- Page 198 ---
CAMPHOR. 189

gad: Vanishing of the senses (in a few minutes.) Loss
regen. bea mca Throbbin: ache in the

forehead, with stinging, continuing vel with gen-
eral dry Bek eunene an secre ar bas stitehes in
the right ns
ache. prone cs he the pag thence coll and felt

ove th a ren tty in the
occiput conmaean the root of the conti thout inter-
mission, the head to ; the pain is
very much increased sing dwn, or externnl
pressure, hands and i ad ft ' i

coma vigil. e bra sl constricted. —

Dull Mecasaunn over the ie ie gon Ce Sind
Congestion of blood to the h (a. 6 by. i
of the head Seems towards the shoulder tes

caused by large dose given toa shag ado
be wt amid wall-

, and vs Shee - hal bade to some-
thing, i in von stand sree agers

firmly. He-rubs his fore
= coe “ae er dM describe his feelings he is
eto senses
See epee og

patele dat
the puto

Cae: hati ty
the arm, and the fingers
pede conan a ahacins dt the

body being weer and kee

the rc
er hind ao
cold over and over:

breathless, for a narter of an hour, (a. 2 h.)—15. Vertigo,

inwards, t agin nh leche

distortions of the muscles of baal

heaviness of the } the head inclines backwards, (a. ten
minutes.) ntoxication. When wal he staggers as if he
were intoxicated. Vertigo recurring at t periods. Ver-
tiginous heaviness of the head, (a, 4+h}—20, Frequent and
short attacks of vertigo, Obtusion of the head, with full con-
perro — of memory. The tetanic fit, with loss of

replies 2 followed by
babihy te vetalioch ne if he dno men 7 Yash ofthe he

senses.—25, Heaviness of the head. che.

the occiput.—30 Aching’ ee Pa he evenings
(a. 9h.) ‘Throbbing pressure in the temples. Quickly pass
; not pay especial



--- Page 199 ---
190 CAMPHOR,

it; if he thinks of his it di i -
mel (a de ‘de h.) Pressare in = millsie ek oho do ts ined

Headache, pressing from within outwards
Gately, )—35. Tea <atiia in the right temple. (a. 1 h.)
Prossure and push within outwards, in the le (7 ads
pie ee with iit as of eae (a. 74 ay"
Eine to the cen’ te brain fi cat 7
aad and and after ian pauses, cag so
a. oh ive pressure from the

Spee the
oo Py {a. 4. h,—
eran ily in the forehead, (0.7 h,

temple and forehead, (a. 14 h,
iit hl othe eh and peei

ah.) uickly
passing amd, pressure, (a. Lh.) | Excessive
rouge paced , lose of conscious
ness, at ness of the bedy appeal primary LOTS
of a dose of Campton, and neg imini ux of

blood to those rom the heart; whereas
the rush of bl sho head, beat in tho heed, otc., are symp-
toms which a of the wers, just as
diminished

t gg goa Rare on
ht remo re palliating
inflammations never. The

use of Camron

inate
ymanency inky the reaction of the organism. 1 am
‘prepared to deny a homeopathicity of external applica-
tions of Campnor to inflamed o dank oeoonge but I can-
not advocate it, for the reason that I never use external appli-
cations in the treatment of ophthalmia.)—45. * Fatal inflamma-
tion of the brain.

Face: * Pale countenance. — Very red countenance. Coun-
bi ami Ys pale, with eyes closed in the first instance, but
5 ards staring and open, the balls of the eyes being directed
ck (a. 2h.) Spasmodic contortion of the facial mus-
ches th foam at the mouth, (caused by several grains of Cam-

a Se tae nto the median vein.)

yvers.—50, Contraction of the Sensation as if all
theca to rh an ining. yaar ne
not a. sensation e exte

pu Ophthalmia. (a. 10 h,)
The balls of the eyes are turned upwards. Staring, wild looks.


--- Page 200 ---
CAMPHOR, 191
inflamed eyes, He looks at every body with eens
a abused ye without omegrng aS a, 2 h,)—
nsation of Femara tn = eager: +b) Breguet

cr deas ge sl Bhs ate ak
pper
Sven Sa

ings and w

ing of the

h. ting od Sng ua

h.)  Lachrymation in the open air, A few Tec

in the white of the right eye. (a 24h.) Pain tn te
eyeball bid dy me oh vi ou 2 Ba +
h.) Sensation Ms the | By it and
—_ epee from y

Excessive contraction the
Guanine of sight, Strange A he up
ra ia
ae es meatus

his eyes,
Ears: A kind of
ps ane in the sey

caer rt ‘. 1) uy, he fll a a
i nian (a. es sup aa irly-six he
as if the place we uleerati
Jaws ann
(a. 10 h.) Pee

an Se

fetid ay

in the sin

himself, (a, 3 ag fine long stitches in the velum pendu-
iim cain the posterior part of the tongue,
sensation 7 per a with much saliva, Continual accu-

mulation of saliva mouth, (a. + hy Horaperpannucsd of

saliva in the mouth, which is wunbi

a. th. pm d aoces Remy sendeiee GH a palste, A cold
Point On eae hag oh eae) a late. (a, 4t0

6h.) ete So in the mouth. Vivlent burning of

ee tote o Hisking, tb Sling) (onmedily.

te 4
Sensation of ne pg aud aaa )

heat in the
Tnnoar :—95. Nightly pain in the rad during and be-
Gash a ond aatreie at if the were sore and

ripped up, with a sensation in the throat, as if one had swal-
lowed rancid things.


--- Page 201 ---
192 CAMPHOR.

‘Gasraic Sympromes anv Appetite: Likes to drink,
out being thirsty. Food has a strong taste; broth has a

strong taste, (a,2h,) Aversion to (although he is
used to tobacco ;) tobacco does not to him; never-
theless it is soon repulsive to him, unto ir. Regurgita-
tion of the —100. Frequent and almost continual

empty eruct inte er dinner. (a, 3 h. 2» dasegbesre|
renee thirst sweney-iir aie Absence of thirst
y-six hours, ‘The taste in the mouth is natural,

tes me thitig he eats wad bitter; even tobacco, which he is
in the habit of smoki jitter. (no. 13 h.) ‘Tobacco
tastes bitter to him. (a. th) . Food tastes bitter, meat
re than bread (with ernictations es. br after a meal ;)

s of = (a. 4h.) nent of wai

Eva ie oe ak ptyalism. * Nausea and ine
1

nition. b pein — aut tation, abe + )—110,

* Short , after inclination to
vomit. d sweat, ally in , at the commence-

ment of vomiting, — s Vomiti ed with blood.
Sromacn: Pain in the stomach. * Aching in the pit of
the stomach or the anterior of the liver—115. Sensa-
enti he = as if it been strained by
n, and bruised ki in cao om
ng sensa-

tion, ee er er a the Spe an
si egppcesiam an pope
a of some the epig
ai a, 4 J Baring oe hyp the ae.
Burning in the Slosneh

ei Sensation of hardness and besitineey in aa ae: abdo-
men over the umbilicus. In the whole right side of the or
peeg- as faras the region of the liver and chest,a ieiap dna
from bruises, more internal than ex especinlly during
cs prabocs acnste piles a, 34 h.}—125. Pinching i in the hypo-
Leip sone ty is Sie aababoal egies a. 7¢ h.) inthe
Si side of the abdomen, a stitching-drawing heaviness, are

is yet more distinctly felt when aon erey pon the part.
in the left itine (a. 1h.) da in the et

12h) sa witha ao wana ng Nate gall
m in a place a hand

-the anterior creat off the itium towards the uterus,—130, Con-

or errant nd igriaboe mar te “ re gta ver-

te the hypochond a nent

emission of flatulence; in a few vie Be le the abdo-

Son, cay" in (Or iicening: ae"tt ERGRSS Uy inalaiio:


--- Page 202 ---
CAMPHOR. 193
Trouble from fa’ ce, in the abdomen, Cutting at
night. (2.8 h'}--136, Proseure in the grotn, Viatcaation
vi} et ap gn gn wr
tion. a Fs fa the groin,

seat iAyrilial batter Bk in. oot oO penis, as if hernia

would protrude, (a, 12h.) Short-lasting ascites.

Soot : Constipation. HE cesta iain of the feces:
they do ara oe stacentnal muscles on the
stretoh, as if the peristaltic motion of the intestines had been
diminished, and as if the rectum had become narrower. (a.
21 bh.) —140, ‘The rectum feels as if it had hecome narrower,
swollen, and is painful when flatulence is being emitted. De-
sire for stool, the stool being of the ordinary kind, little stool,
however, baocp. we this is again followed by an urgent
desire, and @ still lesser discharge of firces, (a. 1h.) Urgent

desire for stool. (a. 4h.) On the first day, two stools with
some pinching in the . no stool on the second day ; on
the thted day the stool ix pretty hard and difficult. Obstinate

constipation.—145, Sensation of erosion in the rectum.
Uninany Ongans: Urine yellow-green, turbid, having a
pot fren (a. 10h.) He emits turbid urine, becoming quite
turbid and thick after standing a while, of white-greenish
color, without any sediment. Red urine, In the first hours,
he emits less urine, without any pain; in a few hours longer
he feels a biting pain, during micturition, in the or por:
tion of the urethra, lasting for several days ; the pain is followed
by pressure in the region of the bladder, resembling a new
sire to urinate-—150. Thin stream, as if the urethra were con-
tracted. (a. 2th.) Retention of urine during the first twelve
hours, with constant pressure in the bladder and desire to uri-
nate, 10 oy cece being a ; in pt Rat hours,
however, requently emits an ordinary quantity of urine ;
in forty-eight hours, the emission is still more abundant. No
uritie for the first ten hours. Strangury, almost immediately,
Diminished power of the bladder; the urine came out of the
bladder very slowly, without there being any mechanical obsta-
cle in the way. (a. 20 b.)—155. Strangury, with desire to
urinate, und tenesmus of the neck of the bladder. Involun-
tary micturition, after a violent pressure upon the bladder,
Almost involuntary micturition, and pain in the urethra after
emission of the urine, resembling a contraction from before back-
wards, Painful micturition. Burning urine during emis-
Genrrat Oncans : = — to nightly emissions


--- Page 203 ---
= CAMPHOK.
Scie ohtconecionie ages Weaken ait

nital neo want of oa the first two. days.
laxation of the scrotum, want of erectionsend sexual instinct
the first two days ; in forty-eight hours the erections are inuch
more violent than ordinarily. (Want. ual desire, ereec-
tions and emissions of semen are siesiae Goan Conapeos;
it acts as a pavarens one uses Winedae anoecioe sexua
desires, erections and frequent poll which hgd existed
Sap ape pees
reaction organism against
crease of the sexunl desire. Amorous poh eager en
the male. A sort of violent labor-pains (in a widow.)
Conn, Cararneu : Expulsion of a thin nasal se apes with-
out sneezing or true Seg early in the 15
and in the hen going to bed. (a. 1 h}—170, Co Co
Sa (a, 10 all Bepaieteniy Mucus in the trachea, making
the “voles ough jit can Deion gt oa a Sain ie thee
y

coughing, even
when en Bes throat,

Curst.: Deep and slow breathing —175. Tho breathing is
almost stopped, “Oppression of the chest, resembling a suflo-
cativ ) as if it originated in a pressure in the pit of the
stomac (a. Lh.) pee stitches in the aionee (a. 2 h.)
toh Seis ioe Ciba, Stesaiah eee

thing.— ug respira-
see: (a, L ih) emai on the sternum, when standing. (a,
27h.) Soft internally Ys pon see speeh Hwee the ster-
num, with ult’ breathing cooling sensation, rising
from the chest into the mouth, ttt 29h. breath is almost
totally arrested. Com of a clive sensation in the
throat, as if prod by the vapor of sulphur—1s5. He
is threatened with suffocation and constriction of the throat,
Stitches in the left chest, when walking. (a. 1b.) Painful
stitch-like sensation in the chest, Stitches in the chest, and
short and cough, as if brought on by a cutting sensa-
tion, accor: with coolness, deep in the trachea. (a. 2 h.)
‘The stitches in and on the chest increase from day to day —
190, After a meal he feels and hears his heart beating against
the ribs, (a. 4h.) A wb ah). on the right side of
the pe y bisa sear \peiree {a.

Back: re, in ie anterior border of the
seapula, mon of he ees (a. 32 h,)
Painful, piu ries through between the scapula,
extending into the chest, when moving the arms, for two days.


--- Page 204 ---
and

per

of the internal surface of the left upper arm, to the middle of
the fore arm. on th.) Painful pressure in the right elbow-
joint, more violent Sp i Sea ean PE
case the pain extends ta the hands, (a. 14 h.)—205. Stitches
tee Gores Grit oh Senne pram ee
ve the t. (a. pressure on
internal of the left

scratching. (a. 4th.) Itching of the kn
and between them. (a, 25 h.)—210. Liching in the palny of
the hand. (a. 5 h,)

Invention Extremrries: Difficult motion and weariness
of the lower limbs. When sitting, or when bending the knee,
the leg goes to sleep, with sensation of cold. (a, 21h.) Early
in the morning, when walking or setting down the foot, pee
in the tarsal joint, as if thispart had been sprained. (a. 15h.)
Cracking of the hip, knee, and tarsal jeints. Tremor of the
feet, —215. ‘Tremulousness and want of firmness of the feet,
Drawing in the ghutens maximas, where it is inserted in the
Caen. of the, diicia, Ae: the Nab. would veep Pa! (on
Drawing pain, as from bruises, in the thighs, afler walking.
(a. 6h.) Drawing pain, as from bruises, in the right thisgh,
and on the inner side near and below the patella; he fears
Tearing inthe thighs, (o-38k)--29), ‘Tho shighs aze tats

earing in the t a. . The thighs are
ful behind, above the bends of the knees, as after a long jour-
ney on foot. Stitches in the anterior surface of the right patella,
when sitting, (a. 1 ot Tearing om the knees, below the pa-
telle, mostly when ng. (a. 6b.) Vacillation, weariness
’


--- Page 205 ---
4 -
196 CAMPHOR.

and heaviness of the lower limbs. (a,1h.) He feelsas if his
knees would suddenly bend, and as if they were bruised, (a.
26 h.)—225. Pressive drawing below the patella, on the inter-
nal surface of the knee. (a. 30h.) Feeling of great weariness
in the feet, when walking ; the legs feel bruised and tense. The
legs feel heavy, as if drawn down by a attached in the
bend of the knee, Pressure in the middle of the internal surface
of the left leg. Pressure on the internal surface of the leg, above
the ankle, rather posteriorly — 230. Drawing, aehi in, when
standing, under the right ankle, between the ankle and the
tendo Achillis; when moving the foot, the pain becomes tear-
ing. (a. 4¢h.) Drawing cramp-pain in the dorsum of the
Soot, expecially during motion. Tearing, with pressure, in
the dorsum of the right leg. Traring cramp-pain in the dor-
num of the foot, along the external calf as high as the thighs.
(a 13h.) Tearing m the tips of the toes of the it foot, and
under the nails when walking. (a. 10 h.)}—235, Sore pain in
the knuckles of the-toes and comms. (a, 26 h.

Gexenat Symrroms: Camphor excites most of its
during motion. Inexpressible uncomfortableness in the whole
pes 4 {ae bh) On the first day most of the symptoms ex-
isted only, when only partially thinking of one's self— the tear-
ng in different parts of the y was felt when dropping to
sleep, and org rh, especinlly the headueche, as soon as
ho ¢ of his pain; next day, on the contrary, he was
able to bring on pain by his imagination; or rather, he re
felt it when thinking of himself with great attention ; he
best, when not thinking of himself at all, Violent itching,
(from applying camphor externally,.)—240, Erysipelas, (from
external application, pairs Spice of the senses, resembling
a ie Toss vee ipso e strikes his breast 0 faints. (a,
+h.)* consciousness, tetanic spasm for a quarter of
an hour, followed by sinking of the whole body, se that he
can be searcely kept upright, for a quarter of an hour; after
Vorniting, consciousness returns. (a. 24h.) Dry feeling in
eres ini sigh ; hates 2 about ~ peortend in the bron-
e nubes, (a. by vAS. Rhoutatic, in in all
the muscles, esp y between ‘the é 5 of the
snc of all the eeindy oe inflammation, (from
camphor externally . motion of the limbs.
Paralytic, relaxation: of the muscles —250, In fe evening,
when in bed, an itching in various places of the body. (a. 6h.)

Weakness, Frrs: * Excessive weakness. Uncomforta-
bleness in the whole body. (a. 3 bh.) Uncommon
of strength, with yawning and . Relaxation

.


--- Page 206 ---
heavi of the whole body, 25 My
Scere: Frequent yawning—260. Yawning ir en,

ness. Soporand deliriam. 1 . Emissions of se
for several nights. (a. 60 h. pans soos eee
Headache, several days in after rising. (The in-

rations are shorter than the expirations, di eae TH gion
sr his sleep, he nuutters oir py The night,
talks with a low voice, while asleep. Snoring, while asloep,
both during the inspirations and expirations, When closing
the eyes, during slumber, he sees objects which at times
seem to him too ro ag times too thin; this appavent differ-
ence alternates with the pulse, (a. 2.h.)

Fever: Small, hoard pulse, becoming more and more slow.

—270. He is too sensitive to cold air, *He catches told
easily ; he is then attacked with chills, or with cutting in the
abdomen, with discharge of black-brown, or black farces, of the
consistence and appearance of coffee-sediment.
(a. o'clock.) Shuddering with goose-flesh ; the skin all over
the body is painful, oven when touched but slightly. The
body is cold all over.—275. Cold sweat. (Fever: violentchil-
liness with chattering of toeth and much thirst; after the chil-
liness he drops to sleep immediately; the sleep is frequently
interrupted, is almost no subsequent heat.) Heat in the
head, with sensation as if sweat w break out, with shud-
dering over the limbs and the abdomen. (a.3h.) Redness
of the choeks and lobules. Heat about the head, on the hands
and feet, without thirst —280, Full, quick pulse. Soper and
clawing (contractive) headache, great heat of the whole body,
with distended veins, very quick breathing and pain, as from
bruises, of the back, but without thirst taste. Warm
swoat on the forehead and the palms of the hands. Warm
sweat over the whole body, The pulse is slower by three
beats.—285, ‘The pulse is slower by tn beats, * Weak, small
pulse. The pulse gradually increases in quickness. By con-
tinuing to take strong doses of Camphor, the pulse becarne from
ten to fifteen beats quicker, and hard. After leaving off taking
the strong doses of Camphor, the pulse became faster, for sev-
eral days (very near ten,) without inerease of animal heat—
290, Pulse accelerated by twenty-three beats.

Quicker . Full, ieritated pulse. A disposition for
inflammations is b ton.  Shuddering, chilliness and
goose-skin over the whole body, for one hour (immediately,)—
295. Frequent chilliness in the back. Slight shuddering, with
paleness of face. Chilliness of the cheeks and back. Chilli.


--- Page 207 ---
198 CANNABIS SATIVA.

ness over the whole hey: (a.¢b.) Chills, and laced,
 Aeresbasprun ts * Coldness of the body, with paieness. Cold.
ness and drawing after a meal, with eld ars hans and feet.
So 4th.) ermine , with deadly paleness of the
ace (from sixty grains.) cold sweat. re Feeling of
t coldness over the whole body, and headache as if the
were contract blip at ope itiahaat nc AnrebaeMisetecenn
(a. 12 h.J—305. Chi over the whole body, Sel 2,h ey bh)
one and a half hour after this, the warmth of the body ine
Chilliness in the back, mingled with warmth, as if sweat eoukd
break out. Feeling of heat in the face, with cold hands. (a.
1! h.) Increased warmth of 2b manouripe iy, with tesa dl $e 0
the face warm the w
a ath 4 oo. Heat over the whole ris increasing
to ighest pitch, when walking. (a. 5b, Prop wih
Sweat (smel of Drago
even when in bed, with appetite, ‘Prembline. bit oye
the heart.

Morat Symrroms :—3t5. Very great anguish. She tosses
about in her bed anxiously, with constant weeping. Confu-
sion of ideas ; delirium. Delirium ; ed rdiinnindoainey things.
Rage, with foam at the mouth.—320. Palpitation of the heart,
All the external objects are repulsive to him, and exeite his ill-
humor; he feels as if he would like to push them out of his
way. "The boy hides himself in a corner, and howls and
screams ; he imagines eer rey Sigg Rote heberya eee es
said im ve he feats ted ire to dispute. Ma-
nia to dispute, He acts and talks too hastily.

CANNABIS SATIVA.

(Mix the recent jaice eque out of the topa of the plant, while
ei male pay wee with unl of
eee. LA eut ur ok eo cme)

Hererorone pe a been noe gies =) Coot one emul-
sion or decoction int) mm stage of gonorrhena, and,
by older physicians, against pears of . ‘The en-
rative powers of Cannabis in acute cea, depend upon

the faculty it possesses of producing a similar morbid eondieos
in the urinary organs, In the country inns in Persia, the herb
is used in a very successful manner, to relieve the fatigue of


--- Page 208 ---
be
” OS.
CANNABIS SATIVA. “199

travellers on foot (see Chardin, voyage en Perse Viarakeoiipt,|
sere csbopar v9 the age “ nature of the drug, as
may be seen by ms 269 to 275. ree
Cannabis ta eased ve Berend pheor 8
agent in various diseases o n fig ie chest, th
pao a i 8 ou m the following series
symptoms.
‘or a long while I have used a small portion of a drop of *
the undiluted tincture at a dose ; but the medicinal powers of
this plant are developed in a much higher by dynam-
pan dag potence, which is the highest potency
now inuse.  ~ , : :

FROM NOACK AND TRINKS.

Cannabis may be employed in the following tions :
H ical conditions.—Convulsions ; tetanus.—Acne 4
sacea (also Caust. Sepia, Led. Lach, Coc. Canth.)—Ob
of the mental faculties. Mania. Melancholia. Gonorrhma,
Scrophulous ophthalmia, with exerescences of the lamella of
the cornea (in conjunction with ac. nite, and cale. car
upon the cornea, remaining after scrofulous ophthalmia; old
specks and ulcers in the cornea, incipient leucoma.—Pannus.
—Cataracta traumatica.—Chronie vomiting.—Gastralgia,—In-
duration of the liver—Colic.—Ascites.—Constipation, with
retention of urine, phimosis.—Acute and chronic affections o
the urinary organs. Nephritis, Cystitis, Gravel (in alter-
nation with resa canina.)—Dysuria. Hematuria. Impotence.
Abortus. Sterility, Leucorrhawa.—Fluor Albus.—Periodical
asthma.— Pneumonia, ht on by violent exercise (short, op-

d breathing, owing rather to aching, than stitching pains,

cough, with tough green expectoration, tion of the heart,
with anguish, s thotiec affection of vessels ;) peri-
pneumonia.—Carditis—Oramp in the calf.

Awripores: Of large doses, a few glasses of sour lemon-
ade; of small doses, Camphor.

The medicinal powers of the hemp from southern regions,
tre more marked than those of the northern hemp.

CANNABIS.

Heap: Vertigo when standing, with dizziness. Vertigo
when walking, as if one would fall sideways, fe 1h.) Sen-
sation as of turning, and stupid feeling in her head (immedi-
ately.) Dulness and reeling sensation in the head.—5. Vertigo.


--- Page 209 ---
e*

-

CANNABIS SATIVA,

ion and gloominess of the head. Doperiainty of the
mind ; the ideas become orerepnenee, | A ge Ina ape Ser]
recollect, without any imagination, seem to
still; he stares; be feels as if he were absorbed in higher
thoughts, but he is fhe din Nk of them; accompanied by a
slight sensation of headache in the region of the parietal bone.
—10. He is indeed able to recollect this and that thing ; but
his ideas remain stationary, while he is fixing with his mind's
— eye the subject that he intends to treat. He frequently uses
wrong ex ns in Writing. pe, ee warmth in the brain.
A sort of jerking sensation in the b the head, chest and
stomach, Con ble rush of blood to the head.—15. Rush
of blood to the head, oceasioning an agreeable warmth in the
head, with headache in the temples, Throbbing pain, extend-
ing into the right temple; accompanied by a warmth around
ie head ; ks are red hot; the nousea increases in
mith. Violent headache. Piercing headache. Unin-
ed headache the whole day, Continual headache on
the top of the head, as ifa stone were pressing upon it, Obtu-
sion of the head ; it feels heavy ; she-suffers with such a pain-
ful pressure on the forehead and eyelids, that they threatened to
become closed. Pressure under the frontal eminence deep
through the brain into the occiput, When in the opposite side,
in the head. Presgure in the temples—25. Aching in the
right side of the oeeipita) bone: ‘Tension, first in the occiput.
terwards in the forehead, lastly in the temples. (a. +h.)
Painful feeling in the head aud nape of the neck, when moving
the head. Drawing pain in the occiput, towards the ears.
Painful constriction of the forepart of the head. The forepart
of the head feels compressed from the margin of the orbits
as far ax the temples; stooping docs not relieve the pain,
Throbbing from within outwards under the left frontal emi.
nence ; shortly afterwards a stunning pressure is felt at this
place. Cold sensation at a small place of the parietal bone
(afterwards also at other places of the head,) as if a drop of
cold water had been dropped npon it. Creeping in the skin of
rigs lee A sort of titillating spasm in the temples.
a. 2h,
ves :—35, Sensation os if the eyebrow were being de-
pressed. Pressure, with tearing on the u eyelid, Alter-
nate dijation and contraction of the pupils m one and the same
light. {a. 1h.) Feeling of weakness of the eyes and t;
both yeas se a are indistinet. nies rhs, H,)) *
cornea becomes aNSparent ; cornea.— 40).
A circle of white-flaming ireadiasions by the side of the visual

e


--- Page 210 ---
°

CANNABIS SATIVA. ~

ray, which causes him to see objects in pee
Cataract. Pressure f within outwards in the ek part
eyes. (n. 4} h. E

Facn: SI ctitations in many places of the ‘espe-
iby delige yap olageen
rawing pressure g ¢ ¢ !
different parts of the face. Tingling, itching, and smarting as
of salt, in the face, a
Nose: Large nodosity on the nose, surrounded by red
swelling, like acne rosacea.—50. Tiching swelling of the wing
of the nose (in a sig Dryness in the nose. Stupefyi
pressure, as if with a point, on the root of the nose. Pee
ing of warmth in the nose, as if it would bleed. Hemorrhage
from the nose, unto fainting —55. * Bleeding at the nose.
Bans: Roaring in the ears. Sensation as if a pellicle
stretched across the ears. Momentary pain, as if the ear wer
being pulled out of the head, Intensely painful darting in the
right tympanum, extending into the shoulder.—60. Pain, as
from excoriation, in the external cartilage of the ear, which he
ee apa pressed upon somewhat when in bed at night.
ng

ing in the ears. Throbbing in the ear. Throbbing, ©

pushing pain in the ear, almost extending into the cheeks, dis-
appearing when stooping, and quickly reappearing when rais-
ing the head again, (a. 3 h,) Stitches in the external meatus
anditorius, when masticating.-65. Fine stitches in the left ear
from within outwards, Pain behind the ear, as if adull point
were being pushed in there with force. Long, sharp stitches
in the mastoid ;

Jaws ano Teeru: Stupefying, compressive pain on the
left side of the chin, which affects the teeth of that side.
Cramp-pain in the left teeth—70, Grambling in the ramus of
the left lower jaw, always followed by a drawing sensation.
Grumbling pain in different teeth at the same time,

Mourn : Eruption in the vermilion border of the lips, and
the comer of the mouth. oorati pressure in the cervical
muscles above the throat. Difficult speech. His speech was
more like a clangor than human voice. He was unable to talk
rareige at times he lacked words, at times the voice itself
failed. (for four hours ;) towards evening the attacks re-
turned ; at times he utt torrents of words, as if he were
driven ; at times he uttered the same expression ten times in one
breath ; sometimes he repeated the whole. idea, and was et
angry when he was not able to repeat it exactly as he had
it at first. Elevation of yoice, accompanied with excessive an-

M


--- Page 211 ---
(*

oa

ae

202 . CANNABIS SATIVA.

fish and torture, owing oe in the back. Early in the
0 Be burning dryness in the . Burning in the throat.
—B80). Dryness in the mouth ; saliva: absence of thirst,
especially in the evening, and ho
Apretire anp Gastric Symeroms: While eating some-
thing which he relishes very much, and having nearly eaten
enough of it, an inclination to vomit rises into his throat,
Gulping up of a bitter-sour, rancid fluid. Tasteless water
rises into he throat and gets into the larynx, which produces
a suffocative sensation ; a cwaver there is neither nausea nor
retching. Eruectation, with rising of a bitter-sour bo into
his mouth—85, Rising of mere air. A sort of retching sen-
sation rises constantly into his throat, as if there were acidity
in the stormach, A sort of retching in the pit of the stomach,
a oa Ain Nausea: she feels a desiye AP rape
ting of a slimy, bitter-tasting water; accom vy a
scraping sensation in the throat, followed by dullness and tae
sion of the occiput—90. Green, bilious vomiting. Anguish in
the pit of the stomach, with oppressed breathing and palpita-
tion of the heart; rising of warmth in her throat, arresting the

_ breathing, asif something were lodged in the trachea, accom-

panied with flushes of heat. Fulness in the abdomen, obliging
one to take deep inspirations, Cardialgia. Pinching in the
pit of the stomach—95, Cutting in the pit of the stomach,
After stooping, a cutting sensation across the bi 2 part of the
stomach, Uninterrupted, dull stitches in front, below the ribs,
by the side of the pit of the stomach, meoriar aight in in-
tensity ; the pain is momentarily diminished by roving the
trunk either forwards or backwards, but it soon returns, =
ing, painful stitches on the right side near the xiphoid ecarti-
lage. In the left side, below the ribs, dull stitches during and
between the oat bernie

Sromacn: At different times violent attacks of pain in the
stomach, with paleness of countenance and sweat of the same,
pulse almost extinct and rattling breathing like that of a dyi
man. Ulcerative pain of the stomach, when touching it;
goes off after eating. Ho feels as if he had caught cold in his
stomach ; in the oon especially, he feels a moving and
pinching in the abdomen ; without any diarrhea.

Anpomen: Pinching above the umbilicus wig a meal.)
Sensation below the umbilicus as if he had caught cold, seve-
ral mornings in succession, ftom 8 to 10 o'clock ; he felt a mov-
ing about in his abdomen, without diarrhaa—105. Pinching
in the abdomen and pat ten the loins. Pinching in the
whole abdomen. Anxious throbbing in the epigastrium, Hke


--- Page 212 ---
*

CANNABIS SATIVA. 3
strong pulsations. Pain on the right side near the umbilicu

>.

as if there were a beating from within outwards. as
with a little hammer, lin in the left side

y orsa
spine, as if the parts were inched by a pair of pincers.
All the intestines are painful as 2, ia :
of the intestines during a violent motion of the arms, as if
were loose, A kind of sore itching in the region of th

umbilicus, for several hours, which is much more painful after
friction, “Tickling sensation of the integuments of the abdo-
men. (a. + h.)—115. Sh in the abdomen, as if cold
water were moving hit. (a, 8 minutes.) Squeezin;
from within outwards in the side of the abdomen. Paint
hard swelling in the right hypochondrium. Swelling of
abdomen, without any sw of the lower limbs. Abdo-
men and chest are been externally—120. Drawing pain
from the of to the inguinal glan
anxious and sick feeling in the pit of the stomach. -
tive pain in the region of the kidneys, both when touching the

rts OF 10, ina ocsupharhl ge date abdomen, close
below the ribs. ay ee pinching stitches in the
abdomen, Movement in the abdomen, followed by dull stitches
in the left side, extending into the ear—125. Incarceration of
flatulence in the and lower parts of the abdomen, until
evening, accompanied by colicky pains. Painful jerkings in
the abdomen in successive places, as if something alive were
in it; accompanied by a drawing from the left to the right os
innominatum, and thence into the knee; the pain remain
at the same time in the hip, where it is felt like pushes, wi
tearing. In the evening, when in bed, she feels a few dull
stitches in both sides of the abdomen; the pain then darts up-
wards along the back, terminating in stitches between the
scapule, and afterwards returning to the sides of the abdomen.
Intensely painful pushes over the left groin. Pricking on the
right side of the mons veneris.—130. A few darting pushes in
the region of i areade, after which the region of the
abdominal ring feels stretched wider, and the ring itself as if it
were being pressed outwards. Pressing from in outwards
in the abdominal ring, accompanied by ulcerative pain. Emis-
sion of a quantity of almost inodorous flatulence. Colicky
pains in ithe epigastrium, followed by diarrhaic stool and
smarting in the anus, as if the si were excoriated.

Sroot: Regular stool the five days, * complete ob-
struction the two next.—135. Pressing in the small of the

*,


--- Page 213 ---
:

>

204, CANNABIS SATIVA.
back and rectum, as if the intestines were descending and
. Were being pressed out; when ; tion in. the anus,
as if something cold were dropping: the skin. Con-
tractive pain in the anus; accompanied by a sensation as if

hs were being drawn towards one another, so that she

is ob to close them. Itching of the perineum, :
Unrrary Onoans: Desire to urinate with aching pain.—
140, Urine white and turbid. Difficulty to urinate ; paralysis
of the bladder.* Urine full of filaments as if pus had been
mixed with it. Enuresis: he is obliged to urinate frequently,
at short intervals, emitting a large quantity of urine resem-
bling water, (immediately.}—145, Tearing, as if in the fibres
Pe e rp gh like gigzug. Itchi ting i arate in the
repart of the urethra, Burning sti in the posterior por-
tion of the urethra, during the emission of urine. (a, 10h,

* Pain, during micturition, from the orifice of the urethra

its termination at the bladder, burning-smarting, rather sting-
ing posteriorly, * Simple, but violent burning in the forepart
of the urethra, ea Sieg emission of urine. —L50. Burning in
the orifice of the urethra during micturition, Burning during
pcosgpat sts inlly immediately afterwards. Burning dur-
ing mictu especially however afterwards and worst in
the evening. Da micturition he feels a pain from the
glans to the termination of the urethra, burning in the begin-
ning, and-afterwards . Between the acts of micturi-
tion a sort of burning pain in the forepart of the urethra, excit-
ing a constant desire to urinate, although there is no urine left
in the bladder.—155. Stinging-sma: pain during micturi-
tion ; biting pain between the acts of micturition. Between the
acts of micturition, a desire for an emission of urine in the
forepart of the urethra, Stitches along the urethra, between
the acts of micturition. Darting stitches in the r portion.
of the urethra, when standing. Burning in the whole of the
urethra, at the commencement and termination of micturition.
—160, Fine stitches, with a sensation as of pecking, in the
forepart of the urethra, between the acts of micturition, Cut-
ting pain in the forepart of the urethra, during micturition.
Discharge of watery mucus from the urethra. Painless dis-
charge of a clear, transparent mucus from the urethra (prosta-
tic juice 7) without erection. ing of the orifice of the ure-
thra by mucus, which becomes visible when pressing upon the

*The urine had to be drawn off by the catheter; but afterwards it
could not even be drawn off by the t, on necount of ite becoming
clogged with mucus and pus. ;


--- Page 214 ---
CANNABIS SATIVA. 205
part—165, The p $s somewhat swollen, without erection. ©

*'The u , and is painful through the whole
of its length, when t it; tensive pain during an eree-
tion. * Sprea steam. Frequént erections, follow by

stitches in the urethra. * Painless discharge of muc
the urethra (4 kind of ooertiba) =<

Genirat Oxcans: Swelling of the glans and penis; a
sort of erection without sensation, Coldness of the genital
organs, with warmth of the rest of the body (on the same day,
continuing three oe oer to an embr.—acel75, Swel
ing of the right and lower side of the prepnee. Swelling of
the frenulum and prepuce, especially at their union. Agreeti-
ble itching of the margin of the prepuce, and the orifice of the
urethra. Disagreeable itching of the anterior border of the
right side of the Hs ice, more towards the inner side ; it be-
comes pleasant ttiig and after seratehing. Itehing of the
lower part of the prepuce and the frenulum, with some red-
porter ls duch ast hor aia iitwies Saschins’as fom

re is dar! , as e

S clation, of tse waareunrand inner side of the prepuce, Con-
tinual burning of the whole prepuce and glans, our: aayat
bathing the part with cold water brought on a pain, as
excoriation. Corrosive burning and stinging of the outer parts
of the p and of the ure in the region of the corona
glandis, Soreness of the margin of the »— 185. The
glans is dark-red, the same as the prepuce. e skin of the
prepuce is covered with bright-red spots, of the size of a pea;
they are brighter than the glans itself When walking, the
whole penis feels sore and burnt, (it had to be suspended.)
Formation of humor behind the corona glandis, round about.
Painful piercing in the right side of the penis, both
when at rest and in motion.—190, Tensive pain in the sper-
matic cord, when, standing, and contraction of the scrotum,
with a contractive sensation inside, Sense alg ars: in
the testicles, a sort of , when standing. ling of
the prostatic gland. Great ex dh hanna gies arpery bara
companied by sterility. Excites the sexual instinct of
in the month, accompan frightful convulsions.

Coe Catankru: Dryness, at sensation of dryness in
the nose, (a.5d.) Sensation of dryness and heat in the nose.
Sneezing, and sensation of dry coryza; the nose, however, is
prea speros, sCg Early in the morning, tough mucus is
lodged in the lower part of the trachea; it cannot be hawked
up; he mnukes great exertions to loosen some of it; neverthe-


--- Page 215 ---
206 CANNABIS SATIVA.

as this pia! pele peer manga os, epee
r the coughing wking, a sense as of seraping remains
in the trachea, as if it were mw and sore; finally. the mucus
gets loose, he has to throw it off. Early in the morning,
she feels a rawness in the chest, as if she had swallowed salt;
she has to make an effort at raising ing, but that which
is got loose, does not get into the mouth, and has to be swal-
lowed. ‘Towards the seventh day bi mucus, which was
tough Previously, Deconits ines difficulty of breathing,
which she had felt up to this moment, diminishes at once,
had felt as if his chest had been oppressed by a ingest
apo eshagars 2 ‘py toa vente nous in ene ot
sternum, which is painful to the touch at ;
acco. panied by drowsiness, Her is aad ie
feels as ifa load were oppressing her chest.—206. Her chest feels
oppressed ; she feels a sort of anxiety in her throat; she hasto
fetch a deep breath, Violent pinching under the sternum, in the
er part of the chest, which does not hinder breathing; it
ppears when bending the head backwards, and is most vio-
e when stooping, and, while stooping, worse during an inspi-
ration. A. sort of pushing in the left side of the chest, without
Sopeeton of brea . With intermittent, dull stitches, a sort
pressing inwards. Pushes or beatings in both sides of the
chest, frequently recurring and arresting the breathing at the
same time, most painful in the region of the heart, When
‘ing exercise, or when stooping, he experiences a few violent
sare Nerpetee me Be it would fall out; at the same
time he felt warm ahout the heart. (a. 48 h.)—210. She feels
a throbbing in the left side in the region of the ribs, Sense, as
of hammering, from within out under one of the cartila-
pad de Nie avgp gr dear Sense, as of burro un-
the upper part of the sternum, without arrest of breathing.
Drawing painin the region of the left lust rib, Stitehes in the
integuments of the chest-—215, Cutting, transversely across
the integuments of the chest. Meanie uliness of the let
half of the chest, with a ag 2 ee of the heart, and
rp ieatac Sse ia song, sega ie
¢ two years, Wi toa i wards ¢atrsi
difficulty of breathing. The beating of the heart i felt ina lower
place thay usual. Pain in the region of the heart-—220, Asth-
ma. Di respiration, without any ration, Difficult
breathing. Orthopnoé ; he was not to breathe, exeept
with his neck stretched, with ebookers, and. by
Breatly ii the abdomen. Difficult respiration when
ying down.—225, Inflammation of the chest and lungs six or


--- Page 216 ---
CANNABIS SATIVA. 207

seven times in succession, * Inflammation of the lungs, with
Nanay J a bilious substance. * Inflarnmation gp st
ungs, wi ium. Painful ing in the t
Cough, excited by expitainn Se tak and hacking cough,
occasionally, commencing in the pit of the throat, a cool, salt
liquid being felt in the lower part of the throat. Coutinual
» Violont ong : ‘ :
Back: Pressure, as. a sharp point, on the os coccygis.
Pain on the left side of the pg ct ip the bone, as if Ae
pert were being pressed violently against a hard body.—236.
jolent aching, and fine, | ante stinaing, He Oy Sky's, in the
Vertebrm, at the base of chest : the pain sometimes da
towards the loins or the scapulm. Dull stitches in the left side
of the back, below the last rib, slowly coming and going. Pain
in the middle of the back, as if some one were pinching the
part with a pair of pincers; the pain extending gradually
towards the atklomen, ‘The pain in the back frequent Seal oo
the breathing, On the right side of the scapula, itching,
stitches, going off afr scratching —240. Burning, under.
right scapula, Lancinations, as with a knife, in gers:
Pons oF he tee ea a Drawing,
along the cervical verte om below '
the nape'f the neck tp the.ear, rexecibling a cram and
rather externally,
Surenion Exrremrries: Pressure, with tearing, ont
of the shoulder, at intervals,—245, wlaspry Be Sue the part be-
tween the end of the clavicle and the head of the humerus, cavises
a pain which darts into the When extending the arm,
Fane soy Ze Snel as if it ene bruised, arte pane
traction of the right ul Boing ® comin © wrist-joint
feels dead ; Rawal unable to move his task Cramp-like
contraction of the metacarpal bones —250, stitch in the
palm of the hand, over the carpal boues. Coldness, and feel-**
ing of coldness of the hands. Cramp in the jointaf the thumb,
while writing. ‘Tingling in the tips of the fingers, as if they
had gone to sleep, and as if they were pithy, (immediately after
taking the Sa A Sudden, paralytic weakness of the
hand; when eating, he was unable to hold his fork ; the hand
trembled when holding something; the hand seemed to be
awkward, and felt a paralytic pain,
Inrenion Exrnemrrigs : Pimples on the nates and thigh ;
- stall, white vesicles, with large, red, smooth border, bu
like fire, especially when hg a them and touching them ;
at the end of two days, they leave brown-red spots, which are
very painful to the touch, A darting, strangling cramp-pain in


--- Page 217 ---
208 CANNAMIS SATIVA.

the right hip, extorting almost a cry. Intense’ nful, sharp
prickings tw the fen the date ree the elt Thrills of
shuddering on the thighs, (immediately.) mapa. | on the
right thigh, as if goose-skin would form.—260. Painless,
crampy sensation on the baek part of the right thigh, as if a
m would begin to twitch. Continued sure, in front,
on the middle of the thi when sitting. vent chills of
shuddering on the feet, from below upwards. Prickling burn-
ing on the left knee, at intervals, Cramp in the calf, when
walking —265, When walking, drawing, like cramp, in the
bend of the knee, along the inner hamstrings. When going
upstairs, the patella nly starts out of its normal position,
and somewhat overlaps the tibia. The right leg is first diffi-
cult to move, then paralyzed, so that there is less motor than
sentient power, Burning in the right tibia when standing.
Painful sudden peckings in the dorsum of the foot-—270, Pain-
ful, tensive stretching in the bend of the foot. Drawing to and
fro in the left foot, from the toes to the ankles. Drawing and

sssingin the heel, when sitting, Drawing in the ball of the

ig toe, Stinging itehing in the ball of the left big toe.

right
) Gexenat Syuvroms —275. Rheumatic drawing in the

recta of the long bones, as if they had been bruised’ by
ws, during motion. Superficial pinching in various ran
of the flesh, as if the parts were seized with the fingers "I'ear-
contractive pressure about the left knee, in the forehead,

in several other parts of the body. Prickings, as with a
thousand needles, over the whole body, at night, when in bed,
and getting into perspiration; he cannot endure it; first he
feels it in a few places ; after removing the sensation by scratch-
ing, he feels it in other places; this symptom is accompanied
by great auguish, and a sensation as of having hot water
repeatedly thrown over him; the symptom subsides upon un-
covering himself. Tearing pustice and agree penetrating
lancinations in different places, especially in the limbs.

Firs, Weaxness >—2S0, Hysteric symptoms, Tetanic
spasms of the upper limbs and the trunk, from time to time,
continuing a quarter of an hour; during the spasms he vomited
a yellow fluid, and was somewhat (The spasms
resulted in paralysis and death. ‘The post-mortem examina-
tion revealed pus in the kidney; thickening of the conts of the
bladder; congestion of the blood-vessels of the diaphragm ;
Kaci toil, in bebertenry aninoneerevee "Ging tate

a weary an 3 every thi i
him, even talking and writing. eg! ny tardies after a
meal, Immediately after a meal, he feels tired in all his limbs,


--- Page 218 ---
CANNABIS SATIVA, 209

and exparioues a tearing pressing in the left side under the
short ribs; the pluce feels sore when pressing upon it-—255.
Indolent in very part of the body. He is indolent and
weak, yawns a good deal and stretches himself, as if he would
sleep, Great weakness afier little exercise; after going uj
stairs, he remained for a long while lying on the sofa quite
exhausted, before he was able to move about again, and to talk
freely, She feels sick in her whole body; cannot remain up;

ns to lie down, owing to weariness and heaviness of the limbs.
He fears lest he should sink down, owing to a sudden weak-
ness of the lower limbs ; he staggers when performing the least
motion ; however, his walk appears to be more steady. (a. 3
h.}—290, Weariness, vacillation and dull pain in the knees.
(a. 1h.) Want of strength of the whole body.

Suecer; Continnal, frequent yawning for o quarter of an
hour, (a, 14 b) Drowsiness by day. Unconquerable drow-
siness in the — 295, wsiness the whole day.
Sleeplessness. Sleeplessness after midnight. Restless i
In the night he is waked from his slumber by frightful
dreams, without knowing where he is.—300, (He has great
fear of the bed; nevertheless he lies down in his bed atter-
wards.) Restless sleep at night, frequent pion confused,
sometimes anxious dreams, emission of semen, followed by
light aus” He dreams of accidents which happen to other
people. Disagreeable and frightful dreams; he succeeds in
nothing, and every thing fills him with great anguish, He has-
confused dreams every night; he recollects them after waking,
up.—305. Vivid, horrid dreams; they do not give him any
anguish ; he maintains a sort of presence of mind. Early in
the ape lays waking from an coogi 4 sleep, he feels
more tired he did the evening before, when lying down.

Fuven: Small pulse. Slow pale, scarcely perceptible,
Chills. —310, Fever, chills, with violent thirst; after drinking
shaking, coldness of the hands, knees and feet ; accompanied
by hurriedness, tremor, distortion of the ; at times weep- -
ing, at times joyous, at times furious mood ; he was angry at all

2s, they made him mad ; at one time the chilliness was min-
what, but were not warm to the touch. Chills, with thirst,
without any subsequent heat or sweat, in the afternoon, (a,
52h.) Mah Nok peace fxtpaty < Seni becomes warmer and
warmef. Warmth feeling of warmth in the face. Sweat

on the forehead and neck, in the uight—315. Thrills of shud.
dering over the trunk, ed with a certain sense of
uneasiness Ses ee SDE shuddering over the


--- Page 219 ---
210 CAPSICUM ANNUUM.

whole body ; it likewise reachés the head, and draws the hairs
together as it were, Chilliness cps Nevcegerie ean
His limbs feel cold to the touch, he chilliness.
Orgasm of the blood. .

Morar Symeroms —320. Nothing gives him any pleas-
ure; he js indifferent to all things, Low-spirited in the fore-
noon, cheerful in the afternoon, Sadness. Bright mood, as
from an excitement by liquor. (a. 1h.) Unsteadiness ande
vacillation of temper.—325. Anxious mood. Even a little
noise canses him to start. (a, 1, bh.) Out of humor, especially
in the afternoon. Méntal derangement, partly with merry,
partly with serious mood. He gets vehemently mad even at
trifles. 330. Sometimes he is attacked with a furious frenzy,
so that he spits into people’s faces,*) A poultice upon the
head produced cohvulsions, subsultus tendinum, death, The

segs pion foe eid ponies aud ae in the
ungs, inflammation nd ati phragm, attach-
ed to the ventricles of the heart, ee

CAPSICUM ANNUUM.

In the East and West Indies, where pepper is grown, it
was generally employed as a . This custom was imitat-
ealictng hae ses og amen dl arte
substituting nent ie brat Ww $ stronger
than the other,) for the purpose stimulating the palate,
peated exciting an unnatural appetite and undernining

The remedial ae Mccain y- yp einen
Bergius (Mat. Med. p. wf Sard cash: tabla ndbogsi
A cpt intermittent Sd beget hed doses of

icom, of two 8S each not only with Caysicum ;
Pesan away by the old hereditary sin of Allemopathy, he
mixed laurel-berries with the Capsicum, in the proportion of
to describe the symptoms of his cases ; he simply


--- Page 220 ---
CAPSICUM ANNUUM. 21
them as cases of old intermittent fever, and, like the whole tribe

of his ; in similar cases, leaves the clinical use of
es Sih an der fi less suitable.
To of a rigid fibre, Capsicum is less sui
A small portion of a of the 18th is quite suf-
i at alite potency Is qui

~ FROM NOACK AND TRINKS.

Intermittent fevers. Nostalgia with redness of the cheeks
and night! sicspisaiican <i gslarte alalgia and me-
grim; Amblyopia amaurdtica.—Proso also Pothergill's.
—Stomacace.— Angina aphthosa ; angina pharyngea maligna,
y Sach Ake areata rei especinily of pregnant females.—
Hlisement of the stomach.—Spasm of the stomach.—Tym-
nitis and flatalence,—Colica flatulenta.—Hernie ventosw.—
prbteers f -—Burming and blind hemorrhoids —
Tenesmus of dder.— Gonorrhea with spontaneous he-
morrhage from the urethra.—Gonorrhata in the second stage,
—Tabes of the reat cia ee eee oe maligna,—
Pneumonia complicated with bronchitis.—Bronchiopneumo
(also Merc. Spong).—Asthma fatulentum, ete. ete. ss

CAPSICUM.

Hean: Intoxication. When wakiyg from sleep, his head
feels stupid, as if he did not know himself. Dizziness of the
head, early in the morning, when waking. Feverish chills
and coldness, with anxiety, sense preg eras, and dullness
of the head, a sort of awkwardness, she aguinst every
thing —5, Vertigo, staggering from side to side. Increased
acuteness of al. senses, (curative effect.) Headache, as if
the skull would burst, when moving the head or when watk-
ing. Beating, throbbing headache in one of the two tem-

les. gegen I in the forehead.——-10, "Throbb
he. Aching in the temples. Aching in the fi
with pressure from the occiput to the accompanied by
a cutting from the occiput (immedintely,) Continual
aching in forehead, above the root of the nose, with occa-
sional stitches through the ear and over theeye. Stitching
ache on one side of head, resembling a hysterie megrim,

increaged by the eyes or head, or by stooping and ac-

Headache more stitching than tearing, worse


--- Page 221 ---
212 CAPSICUM ANNUUM.

when at rest, more moderate during motion. Distensive
headache, or as if the brain were too full, Distensive ache in
the forehead. Drawing ache in the forehend:—20, lyre :
headache.) Gnawing itching, as of vermin, on the hairy
sealp, obliging him to serateh ; after the scratching the roots
of - hairs and the sealp ached as if the hairs were being
puiled out. b

PO a yay of the head. Emptiness and dullness of the
je a. 4 h.) Gloominess aes obtusion of the head.

ting in the temporal region,—5, Drawing teari ain on

the frontal bone, rather on the right side. "« 6, Phe an 3d.)
Drawing, tearing pain in the left side of the head. (a, 17
48 h,) Violent, deeply penetrating stitches in the vertex,
Slight shuddering over the hairy scalp, followed by burn
pee Sey a by seratching, but returning afterwards wi
redoubled violence. (n.2h.)]

Face: Pain in the face, either pain in the bone, which
niay be excited by touching the parts, or fine pain in the
nerves, tormenting one when falling asleep. (Pimples on the
loft side of the face, smarting like salt.) points in the
fave, — pores on the forehead, with corrosive itching. (a.
2. an k

[Unusual redness of the face, without heat; in half an hour,
a wretehed, pale appenrance. (a. 3 h.}—10, Sweat on the
forehead,

Eyns :—25. Dilatation of the pupils. E Bowie from
their sockets, with paleness of countenance. (at h.) Aching
in the eyes, as if a foreign body were lodged in them. Burn-
ing in the eyes, early in the morning; they are red, with
lachrymation. Stinging pain in the eyes (from the vapor.)—30,
Inflammation of the eyes. Dimsightedness, early in the morn-
ing, as if a turbid substance wert floating over, and obscured
the cornea; by rubbing the eye, the brightness may be restored
for some moments. All objects appear black, brought
before the eyes. Almost complete extinetion of sight.

Bape of the pupils. Pressure upon the eyes; he is
unable to open them sufficiently, .

Ears: in the a.—35. Itching pain deep in
the ear, (a. 16h,), conv, in the ear, (a.1 and 8
psc dems on the petrous bone, painful when touched. Pain

er the ear. '


--- Page 222 ---
CAPSICUM ANNUUM, 213
Rie spineametoon the nose. Painful pimples under the
nostrils.

Contractive, darting pains in the left side of the nose, over
the 5 (a. 5 h.)—15, Burning-tensive sensation in the
left_ nostril, as ifa pimple would form in that part.) ;

Jaws axp Trern: Uleorative eruption on the lips, not in
the corners, painful only when moving them. S lips—
45. Lips scaling off. agades of the lips. Swelling of the
gums. Drawing pain in thegums. Drawing in the tooth,
which is neither increased when eating, nor w
tooth.—50, ‘The teeth feel to him as if they were elongated and
raised, also dull, Pimples on the inner side of the cheeks.
ri sy on the tip of the tongue, with stinging pain when

touc

{Burning of the lips. Pain on the left side of the lower
dase 9 tapas were a tumor or an ulcer, for three quarters of
an hour.

* 'Tunoar: Ptyalism. Pain, during deg lutition, as if the
throat were inflamed; between the acts of deglutition, oagen
in the throat was dmwing—55. Pain in the upper part of the
fauces, between the acts of deglutition, as if the parts were sore,
and were being ically drawn together, as in water-
brash. Simple in the fances, only when coughing. Pain
in the velam pendulum palati, as if it were pressed by some-
png Wane OF eee pinched, first more between
the pets, wards more during degiutition, (a 14 hb.) Spas-
modic contraction of the pe pH of the rene

Darting-tearing pain right cervical alan

penne and Avperrre: Feeling of dryness.on the aly a
of the to without thirst, etirly in the the (a. $ h,)
Absence of thirst, Tenacious mucus in the mouth, (a. 2h.)
Taste in the mouth, as of spoiled water. Flat, insipid taste,
as of clay, (for instance: of the butter.)—65. Watery, flac
taste in the mouth, afterwards heartburn.  Hearthurn.
Rising from the stomach only when walking; every erncta-
tion being accompanied by a stitch in the side ; no eructation
when sitting, therefore no stitch. Aprid, sourish taste in the
non Sour taste in the mouth.—70. ‘The broth tastes sour.

a. 2 .

: cme and Gasrate Symerosrs: Flatsensation in the
stomacht Coldness inthe stomach ; sensation, as if cold water
were in the stomach, sewia a pea as pints yrs
bling. Want of a te. Want of appetite, although

renee well og ang FPrequeut yawning after a meal. De-
sire for coffee. (a. 8 h.) Inclination to vomit, and spitting, after


--- Page 223 ---
214 CAPSICUM ANNUUM,

taking coffee. Inclination to vomite Qualmishness and in-
ee « vomit, a the : of the a ey - rs rer
an ernoon, (a, -)}-—S0, Pressure in the pit o
Pherae with inclination to vomit. Fulness and anxiousness
in the chest, after 2 meal; afterwards sour risings or heart-
burn, finally thin stool, Stool and redness of the cheeks, im-
inédiately after dinner, (a..6h.) Burning over the pit of the
stomach, immediately after a meal. Burning in the stomach,
extending into the mouth, after breakfast, —{20. Aching in
the pit of the stomach. Pain in the pit of the stomach, pinch-
ing, boring from within outwards, especially when. sitting
crooked, continuing for eight minutes (a. 14 h,
Azpomen :—S6. Pain, deep in the abdomen, more
than stitching, accompanied by cutting in the umbilical region,
during motion, especially when or walking, the pain
making one dissat > inanimate thins excite a desire to
wi men or moral objects do not ;) the ill humor is agcompa-
nied by a sort of apprehensiveness and sweat in the face. Op-
pressive tension it the abdomen, expecially the epigastric
rezion, between the pit of the stomach and the umbilicus, es-
pocially increased by motion and ear sage with tension
and pressure in the lower part af the ba Distention of the
abdomen, two hours after a : afierwards headache, dart-
ings in the direction of the occiput, and frequent sweat. Twn-
sive pain from the abdomen towards the chest, ax ¥ caused
istention of the abdomen. Distention and harduess
of the abdomen; she was unable to bear any tight clothing.—
boi erate na as pi abdomen opt reoioe ri Len
, producing a suffocative arrest o ing. mbli
in’ the abdomen upwards and downwards. Grunting in the
abdomen, as if from flatulence. (a. 1h.) Pinching in the
epigastrium. Pressure under the short ribs and in the pit of
the stomach.—95. Hard pushing, almost stitching pain in a
small of the left iliac region. (a. 1h.) Pressure in va-
rious of the abdomen. ne aching in the abdo-
men, immediately after a meal, with ion of fatu-
lence, Colic, as if from flatulence. Painful movernents of
flatulence in the abdomen, panes Ayes) ek syns of the
abdominal vessels, Increased wa of the intestinal canal,
Painless rumbling in the abdomen,—25. A number of flat-

ulences, .
Sroot: Colic, cutting and writhing around the umbilicus,
accompanied on of a tenacious mucus, sometimes

streaked with black blood; every stool is followed by thirst,
and every drink by shuddering. Drawing and turning


--- Page 224 ---
CAPSICUM ANNUUM. 215

about in the abdomen, with or without » Flatulence
por nar fho-srmgy out at the sip oT Fi ie a
ent colic in the abdomen, owed by small, fregu
stools, ; of mucus, which is sometimes mixed with
blood and causing tenesmus, Mucous diarrhera with fevesmus.
—105. Diarthoa. immediately, followed by tenesmus, without
stool. Small stools, consisting of mere mucus, Small stools
consisting of bloody mucus. Trnesmus. Constipation, as if
there were too much heat in the abdomen.—ll0. Burni
pain in the anus. (a.3,4, 8h.) Ttehingof the anus. (a,
‘ Sh.) Smarting, stinging pain in the anus, during diar-
Blind hemorrhoids, varices of the anus, very painfal
during stool. Varices of the anus, sometimes itching —115.
Bonen si hc ons igi nur a -.
ressure, nu itestines, with desire
stool; but no poueiabee: weed Afier drinking, he has
to go to stool, in ee of his costiveness ; he only miu-
cus. As soon as he drinks something, he feels as if he would
have diarrhoea; but he only passes little at a time.—30, Burn-
ing at the atus.|

Uniwany Onoans: Tenesmus of the bladder ; frequent,
but unsuccessful dexire to urinate, (a, 4, 8 bi.) The urine is
emitted in drops, as if it were over the urethra ocen-
sionally, (immedintely and for a longtime.) Frequent desire
to urinate, mostly when sitting, not when walking. (a, 42h.)
Burning urine.—120. Burning, smarting pain in the urethra,
after micturition, (0, 7 ee Burning in the orifice of the ure-
thra, immediately before, during and after micturition, Pain
in the urethra, especially in the forenoon. Fine stinging in
the orifice of the urethra, immediately after micturition, Prick-

in the anterior portion of the urethra, between the acts of

ting. (a. 8 h,)—125. Violent stitches in the orifice of the
urethra, between the acts of micturition, Cutting pain in the
urethra, between the acts of micturition, from back-
wards. (a. 6h.) The urethra is painful to¥the* touch. (a. 7
d.) ‘The urine ts a while sediment.

[Spasnodic coutraction of the neck of the bladder, with cut-
ting pain, not being exactly a desire to urinate, going and
coming, early in the morning, when in bed; the che ecg
seems to diminish somewhat, by emitting urine. (a. 24 h,)]

Gexvrat Onoans: Continual pressing and peas in
the glans, especially morning and evening.—130, ly in the
morning, the scrotum feels cold. Coldness of the scrotum, and
impotence. Nightly pollution. Drawing pain in the spermatic
cord, aud clawing pain in the testicle, during emission of urine.

7


--- Page 225 ---
216 CAPSICUM ANNUUM.

and some ti rwards, (a,48h.) Erection, forenoon, after
noon, and evening —135. Erection, early inthe morning, when
in bed, without any amorous thoughts, Violeuterection, early
in the morning, when rising, which ean only be subdued
eold water. Excessive trembling of the whole body, when
lying with a female. (#. 24h.) Porulent discharge from the
urethra. ‘The gonorrhma becomes yellow and thick. (a. 7 4.)
—l40, Pressure in the pit of the stomach, with inclination to
vomit, sages doi menses.
[Fine, itching stinging of the plans, like mosquito bites.
Gonorrhea (from wearing on the bare abdomen a linen bag,
which was filled with the berries of Capsicum bacea-
tum. ‘

))
CoLp, See ee re abe sehr ypc as in
ry cory coryza. Hoarseness. Mucus in the upper
ao of the tinchen, which has to be thrown off casaaionaliy by
awking and cough (a. 3h.) —145. Frequent and
barking congh. Dry, frequent, barking cong Cough, espe-
cinlly towards evening, (from five to nine o'clock.) In the eve-
ning, after lying down, tingling and tickling in the larynx, and
dry, short and hacking congh. Cough, especially after drink-
ing coffee.—150, Painful congh, Pain in the throat, when
coughing, a8 of a simple, swelling. Aching in the
throat, only during the coughing fit, as if an uleer would open.
Headache duting cough, as if the skull would break. Congh
excites an inclination to vomit.
uring tingting in the nose, with violent sneezing and
use discharge of mucus, (immediately, from the vapor.)—
35. Violent, concussive sneezing, with discharge of thin nneus
from the nose, (immediately.) Rough sensation in the throat,
(fortwo days.) ‘Tickling sensation in the throat, which brought
on several violent sneezi Continual stitehes in the throat,
in the. of the epiglottis, exciting a dry cough, without
going off by it, During the cough, and a little while after, a
pressing towards The bladder, and « few stitches in the region
of the neck of the bladder, from within outwards,

Cust -—I155. ing fits in the afternoon, exciting an
inclination to vomit, vorniting. Every coughing fit is ac.
companied with an aching pain in the ear, as if an ulcer would
open. Drawing we when coughing, in the side of the chest,
extending up to the neck. When coughing, pain in the side
of the thigh, extending as far as the ‘pressing into the
parts deeply. © or sneezing canses a sudden pain in
one or the other limb,—160, When coughing, the air from the
lungs causes a strange, offensive taste in the mouth. When


--- Page 226 ---
CAPSICUM ANNUUM. 217

eoughing, a badly smelling breath rushes out of the lungs.
Pain of the ribs and sternum, when taking an inspiration.
Pain of the chest, under the rigiit arm, when touching the
place, or rising the arm. *Simp pain in the region ofa rib,
ata small , Worst when touching the parts, but neither
excited by breathing nor Ler ig .—165, When coughing,
pain, like stitches, in the side of the oe and the back. en
taking am inspiration, stitching pain between the scapule and
in the region of the stomach, and a few single stitches in the
side of the abdomen, in the xiphoid cartilage and sternum ;
these pains appear to be merely superficial, When taking an
inspiration, while walking, a stitch in the side of the chest;
not when sitting. Several violent stitches in the region of the
heart. Anxiousness, which obliges him to take deep breath —
170. Involuntary, violent expi He is frequently obi:
to fetch ove deep breath ; he imagines this will relieve all his
ea ae Deep breathing, almost like a sigh, Pain in the
chest, when sitting, as if the chest were too full, and did not
contain shea enough. Asthma, even when st rest, with stiff
back, feeling sore when bending over, accom from time
to time by a deep inspiration like a sigh, and by dry cough.—
175. Asthma, sensation of fulness of the chest. Asthma, ap-
parently coming from the stomach. The cea, pra
easier from day to day, (curative effect.) Asthma, with redness
of face, ernctation, and sensation, as ifthe chest were extended.
Asthma, when at rest, and in motion.—180. Orthopnoe. Pain,
as if the chest were constricted ; it oppresses the breathing,
and increases, even by the slightest motion. Pain, us if
chest were pressed upon, when turning the body, or when
taking a deep inspiration. Asthma, when walking.  Tyvirob-
bing pain in the chest.—185. Aching pain in that side of the
chest upon which she is resting.
40.—Single stitch in the left side of the chest, between the
third and fourth ribs, as with a dull pin. Stitches in the left
re in the region of the fifth and ninth ribs. i 1h.) Single
in the left side of the chest, between the second and
third ribs. . Sh.) Stitehes in the left side, arresting breath-
ing. (a.10h.) Stitches in the left side of the chest, when
cing an inspiration, between the third and fourth ribs.
Back: Pain in the small of the back, drawing, from above
downwards, when standing or moving about, with pain as from
briiises, Pain in the back, when wae. Drawing pain in
the back. Drawing, aching pain in ck.—190. Stitfness
of the nape of the neck, diminished by motion. Painful stiffness
of the nape of the neck, which is felt only when moving it.


--- Page 227 ---
218 CAPSIOUM ANNUUM.

Rexting ped 9 ennge ot Re na Pain in the external *

(45. Drain “ti ain in the side of the
Spikes pate. ya ding oe Eee in the
middle of the spinal column. sk ee beet

Ar Fs ee i Wan peng pressing upon it.
a.
Svrerton Exrarmrries: Sweat under the axilla. (a. 8
h. alee Pain in the shoulder-joint, as if it were sprained.
pain above and below the ee
Fine, stin sti apna the rer the wrist, (from the vapour.
t a. 3h.)

in sweat in pa Pe ae
pa coaating t clavicle
into ie whe of ee ra ace eee thts the fingers,
for 3 minutes. Stitches in the left wagy skew darting as far
as the hand, and with flushes of heat; after-
wards the arm felt as if it ed pono se sleep.—50, Groaning
in in the leftlowerarm. Painful, twitching sensation in the
hollow hand. (a.8h.) Contractive pain in the left index
ee r. Violent, deep stitches in the ball of the left little
ngers,
2s is ee Exrremitres : Drmwing pain in the Hiatal
the pain felt in a stiff neck,) Increasing by contact
ded by beiline tos rank backed 200, Lancinating pain
from the hip-joint down to the feet, especially when aoatlie,
Pain in the muscles of the thigh, resembling an aching, and as
if the parts had been strained. Tensive pain in the knee.
Straining pai in the calves ake walkin “ti, (Pain, as from
bruises, in the heel-bone, as if the heel « bruised
and pithy in consequence of a lea Bi fi aca pin be
comes tearing, in paroxysms,) (a. 2 h.)—205, Stitehes coming
oe eine red big ho th h dis
nh, as from in the right any a
while tight tiles when at rst68. Pang : oh ei
2 sin e t thigh; when et out-
wards, Sistas ines on aad ie an vee not other-
wise, Conyulsive ge fea and twitching, now of the ae
fe gaps gage ee Ne 7 aint) ebro te -
thig rawing-stitching, wing) pain in t
middle h_ Drawing sching de ie ety en if by
motion, Internal pain in the left psdieid vt of drawing
and stitches.—60. Single stitches in the big toe of the right
foot, ceasing when stamping with the foot upon the floor, ]
GeNneRat ics, hae Superficial, drawing pains in dif-
ferent parts of the joints, in the back, nape of the neck, seap-


--- Page 228 ---
CAPSICUM ANNUUM. 219

ule and hands, for many hours ; are excited by motion.
Cracking of the knee and Aes eosgs In all the joints he expe-
riences a sensation of stiffness and simple pain, greatest when
commencing to move about, alleviated by continuing the mo-

tion; accom by a catarrh and a of tenacious
mucus fromthe trachea. Early in the morning, when rising, he
feels as if all his joints were .a paralytic painful stiff

a
ness when ing to move, especially in the knees and
tarsal joints, relieved by continued iesiioes a. 10h.) —210.
After having been lying down, all his joints stiff ; early
in the morning, when rising, he feels as if all his joints were
broken ; the paralytic feeling in the knees and tarsal joints is
much more seyere when at rest, than when in motion. All his
joints are ul as if they were dislocated, accompanied with
a sensation as of being swollen. Cramp, first in the left arm
and afierwards in the whole body ; the arms were stiff, she was
unible to straighten them; the feet likewise were stiff when
rising from a seat; they felt a tingling and as if they had gone
to sleep. ‘Transitory 7 iy | oe times in one, at times in
another part of the body. Creeping in different parts of the
skin, as of a fly.—215. Sensation over the whole body, as if
all the parts of the body would go to sleep. (This gensation
was speedily relieved by inhaling the vapor of sulphu®. ‘Ting-
ling sensation in the upper and lower limbs, from the foot to
the pharynx, Itching in different parts of the skin, mostly
however in the face and nose. The place itches simply after
merely touching it.) Itching in the hairy scalp and of little
places all over the pens Hn off by sighily seratching the
parts, 220. (Red, round spots on the abdomen and thighs.)
A sort of ing upwards and downwards in the body, with
redness of the cheeks. ;

[Corrosive burning of several delicate pas of the 3
(lips, fen tke vie “ bg Hy Ba : shine pri * platen
etc.,) (from the vapor. ngit ew
Sie greatest on the chest may the face.

Weraxwess, Firs; Lassitode of the limbs, when
at rest and when sitting, Great weariness, which however
does not invite him to sleep, pd Canetti Ser
more tired than in the evening.—225, T mbling, weakness of
the feet, Complete depression of strength. dreads all
kinds of exercise.

[F'aintness and heaviness of the limbs, followed by trem-
bling of the upper limbs and knees; the hands felt too weary
to write, (a. am »(Gurgling rapid beating in some of the
larger vessels, (a, 24 h.)]


--- Page 229 ---
220 CAPSICUM ANNUUM.

Steer: Sleep full of dreams. Sad dreanis of past sas ot
when waking he knew not whether he had really bad a
dream, or no.—230, Dreams full of contrarieties. His sleep is
interrupted by screams and startings, as if he fell down from
a height, He snores thrrough the nose when asleep, as if he
could not get any air th the nose and his breathing were
arrested. (a, 1h.) He wakes up several times after mid-
night, and even later, he is awake—235, He is wide
awake in the night, and is unable to sleep. (a. 5, 9 h.)
Sleep drives away his repugnance to all things and his ill
humor. Almost uninterrapted yawning. (a. {h.)

Frver: Cool air, and especially a draft of air, is contrary
tohim. (a, 12h.) The warmth of the body becomes less and
less. —240, Coldness ey the whole ere “ns limbs are cold,
without any shudderi ing experienced. proportion as
the vier bot of the body stiomaeecthe low-spiritedness and the
contraction of the sone decrease likewise. (I have seen that
coldness inereasing for eleven hours, and gradually disappear-
ing again in the twelve following.) Shuddering and shaking
chills after drinking. Excessive chilliness, in the evening,
alter tying down, followed by coryza, (a. 72h.) Chilliness,
in the ing —245. He feels chilly when lifting the cover of
the bed so little. When walking in the open air, sensa-
tion in the thighs, as if they were covered with cold sweat, (as
when cold air comes in contact with a part in a state of perspi
ration ;) nevertheless the thighs did not sweat. He trem
and shudders. Shuddering and chilliness in the back, in the
evening, followed by slight sweat, but neither heat nor thirst.
(Feverish shuddering, in the evening, with thirst, (without heat
or yawning and stretehing,) with apple aio short breath,
drowsiness and ill-humor; at the least motion he experiences
a shuddering, without feeling cold either to himself or to the
touch—nevertheless he did not feel too warm, even in « hot
room.}--250. Chilliness and coldness the first night; in the
night following, she sweats all over the body. Sweats all over
the body, ee in the morning. General heat and sweat,
without thirst, for some hours; then, shuddering, at six
o'clock in the evening, with shaking andehattering of teoth
—he felt thirsty and cold all over the body, with anxiousness,
restlessness, inability to recollect sg Sa intolerance of
noise ;—next evening, at seven o'clock, the same shuddering,
chills, with shaking and coldness, with thirst. Heat, at the
same time sh , with thirst for water. Heat in the
face and redness, with tremor of the limbs (immediately.}—
255. Glowing cheeks, after dinner, with cold hands and feet,


--- Page 230 ---
CAPSICUM ANNUUM. 221

without shuddering—returning two successive days at the same
time, Red cheeks, The face is alternately pale and red,
together with the lobules, with a burning sensation, without
any particular heat being felt when touching the parts. (Burn-
ing of the hands, feet and cheeks, the latter being swollen.)
Hot ears, and hot, red tip of the nose, towards evening.—260.
(Internal heat, with cold sweat on the forehead.)

[65,—Heat of the hands, but not of the other parts of the

Coldness of the feet, as far as above the ankles, they

cannot be got warm, although the remainder of the body has
the usual natural warmth, in the morning. (a. 12 h.)}

Monat. Symeroms: Taciturn, indifferent to all things.
‘Taciturn, obstinate re pire nee and ill-humor.
—265 and crying. (a,

; h.) He

ious Gi, even in Woe ean of eating. He mae.
east trifle, even in the mi jesting. y ensily,
He imagines he is cxeratiabnnh oth Poneat tte es him
restless.—270. Tendency to start. ‘es 2h.) Capricious ; at
times he Jaughs continually, at times he weeps. Jests, humor-
ous speeches. He is contented, joking, warbles a song, and
nevertheless inclines to get angry from the least cause. (a.
4 h.) Contentment, (curative n.)—275, Steady mood,
ati oe iris a be pil die. Want of divest

Angui imagi ie. Want ‘on to
wor oF think, Calm mood, (curative action.)]

END OF VOL, I.


--- Page 231 ---
| .  % :
- ‘ é +A * -
»f 4 a ad . ‘ :
“ b J
> ;
te
LIST OF NAMES OF DISEASES :
. Cirbaaele, . . fr
A < Cardialgia, epadin of the stoi
Acne, redness of the now and Och, OR i dn!
After-pninw, - Chchenis, meron, ¢ pi
Affections, 5 nn, £2, 3,99
“ cutaneous, . 154, 1 Congeations: a Wass 20
a bilious, .  - Coma, an inclination to sleep,

_ . . i 4
Amblyopia, defect of wight, 23, Contusions,  - » @8 64
_ 65,211 Cold, - » 2
Angina, 2 oe Col Noe ae cits
Anorexia, indifference to food, 103 ioeredhne , =
Aphonia, hoarseness, . Constipation 2. 103, ie

Apoplexy, cerebral congestion, 23 au of every kind, 4, 63;

Arthromeningitix, . . ton veel 24, 104, 158
Asthma, of all kinds, 5,23, 105, 190, Coxalyia, pain in the hip-joint, 6,
211 105
Atrophy, Ot OP Gtoapt el, alll é
B. | Crustalacten, 2. 5 2 4
Bladder, teneemus, == 211 | Cyatitin, . 5
Bed-wore, 63, 100, 154 D
Blepharophthalmitia, ranning . .
of the eyelide, . - + 4) Deliriumtremens,. . . 188
Blows, consequences of, . Gt Dentition, difficult, 2. 5
Bronchitix, . . ~ 157,211 Dementia, bed-sore, . . 4
Bronchiopneumonin, «© =~ 212 | Deranyeimont, mental, » wo
e sc. pa incontinent flow of
Cutalopay, transitory cossntion - « 82) 10¢
of the physical and te Diaphovigii - «187
cal functions, .  . 4) Diorrhos, . 64, 157, 186,211

15"


--- Page 232 ---
bad 7? * .
QA 6 ner OTR Se emp °

Hemet spitting of wal

105, 1

-
Dywuria, a suppression of, or

difficulty in voiding urine, 03) Hmmoptoe, bloody cough, . 65
Dysphagia, vin ca Hiemorrhoidy,. . 5, 103,811 »

Headache, 4 _ 88101, 156, 188

Enuresi mee ay ' Helininthiasia, oo 85

el

sce . Hernia, . - + 5,103,211

pani Wei athe so, " Higoough, = +n AT

Ergotietn, atin, AT ve ydrophobia, -') "eee
carting g-) 8 eer a -
am Hysteria, . « ~« + 2B
Fr. L.
Feet, atema of, . , - i Tlunionn, optical, . . 108

Fevers, of all kinds, . 63, 65, 10),

154, 155, 156, 187, 211
Fits, fainting, = -

* gpoplectic. ete, ©
Fright, consequences of, 3, 63, bo)
Frenzy of purturient women, 63
Frozen limbs,. . - 6, 100

Impetigo, a disease of the skin, 100

Indurations, . im

Inflammations, 3, 5, 64, 99, 102, 187
. erysipelatons, of

the mame, < 65

Influenza, . 63, ~ 187, 188, 211

102

Tri
Fungus medullaris, 108 aie et petiagage
Jaundice, « : ° 99, 154
Galactirrhas, excrssive flow 2” 1
of milk, .  - 157
Gustric conditions, - 108, 157 | Larynginmue atridutas, 104
Glande, affections of, 00, 154 chronic, . 52
Glosaitix, « 5, 102 pen Seiliats . 100
Gonorrives, e 211 7 & 23
Gout, . - + 69 | Lienterin, diarrhaw of undi-
a. Limping, spontaneous, . 65, 159
Homatemezia, vomiting of Lips, swelling of, .  .
blood, §, 64,103 | Liver, aching, . — - 23
Hemutocele, effusion of blood Lockjaw, =.  . 29
into the ecrotum, . ~ 64 | Luxations, epontancous, 154


--- Page 233 ---
u

a s. ;
- , «!
F 4
e © LIST oF NAMES OF DISEASES. » 995
ail ? M. \* es ~ ' =
Méstsdynia, pain’ in thé fg | Phiegmasin albu dolens, 65, 105,
fo” ee - 6,65, 105; 158
% ’ “ 4, 65 nin, . 4 . . «6
enses, proto, *. nod | PNetmonin, & 65, 1008, 188 21
Metastases, . . y 100 Finite tone : Pie
Motritin, - . . « 104 . . Dania ia E 4
Metrorrhagia, . 16,65, 157 Rrowopalgia, neuralgia of the
Miliaria, 99 ae 4,105)
Milk, bloody, a ; inflammation of the
Milk, deficiency of, s *S accompa ral 5,
Milk fever, 63 als ‘>
Myelitia, infammation. of the Aang Senay |
spinal marrow, ~ 39, 105 ~~ - 7
Fis
N. "Ramoliiasement of stomach, 211
Nephritis, inflammation of the Rosh,. - + - $
kidneys, . § | Retinitie,  . +. - 1028
Nettle-rash, - 6 ae paralytic, : i
N . 4 “ inat | id
“ane : . | Rubeole,. . 100
Noss, bleeding at, 156 “og i
Nose, chronic obstruction of, 156 | Scarlatina, 4 3, 100
Nostalgia, home-sicknesa, . 211 | Sciatica, . . ; . 6
Scirrhue of mamme, . 104
0, Scirrhus, J °
Oophoritis, inflammation of the Scrophulows,. 2 2. ®
ovaries, =< 6 | Sexual instinct, excitement of, 23
Ophthalmia, : ‘4, G, 156 Sleeplesmess, 2 . . 100
Otitie, inflammation of the Spasme of every kind, . =, 99
bones, . . 4, 65, 102 | Spasm of the eyelids, , 102
Oxnens, sceretion of fetid pus Stomacace, putrefaction of the
from the nose, . . 102,156) mouth,, . . 103,157,211
Stomach, spasm of, 2
P. Status nervowu,, . . 63
Palpitation of the hesrt, . 6| Stingeof insect, . . 63
Panaritium, F . 100) Stitches, pleuritio,. . 188
Paralyaia, . 23) Stitches aplenctic, . . 64
Parotitin, . 102) Sun, stroke of, » « 4 198
Pomphigue, . 100) Swelling, inflammatory of, 105
Peritonitis, - . 5,103,157 | Bynocha, =... ‘


--- Page 234 ---
Be

«
Tarantixmus, irresistible de~
sire for dancing and wah

LIST ov mains OF DISEASES. :

Page | Uleers, putrid,

« ne

Urinary organs, nfurnmatory
irritation of, . 188

_eansed by the bite Urine, retention of . . Gf
rantula, .~ - , 99! Uteritis, inflammation of the '
Testes, swelling of, oA uterus, =. 5

— tabos iB ne -
ey Variola, - » 4,100
si oo Hits. conntipation, 23, 64,
oo. PF 155, a Voeniting, r . 65, 103
‘ U. w.

Weukness, nervous, .  . 23
Uleers, mercurian, . =. =. 99 | Whooping-cough, . =~ 66, 104
Ver syphilitic, of fuucest, 821) Wound-fever, . 68

7 —:
