Materia Medica by James Tyler Kent


ACETIC ACID
This remedy is useful in complaints of pale, sickly people. Patients who have been weak for many years, who have inherited phthisis. Emaciation, weakness, anaemia, loss of appetite, burning thirst and copious pale urine arc a combination calling for Acetic acid. Sensation of heat with pulsation coming and going, like orgasms; chlorosis in young girls; dropsical conditions in general; bad effects from stings and bites, have been cured by this remedy. Vinegar is an old remedy for bad effects from chloroform. It is useful in the haemmorrhagic constipation. Bleeding from various mucous membranes, nose, stomach, rectum, lungs and from ulcers. Sensitive to cold.
Confusion of mind; does not know her own children; forgets what has recently happened; attacks of anguish; constantly borrows trouble; thinks something is going to happen; peevishness; complaining.
Fainting spells in weak, anaemic subjects; headaches; face pale and waxy; epistaxis; one cheek pale and the other red; diphtheria in throat or larynx; unquenchable thirst; sensitive stomach; vomiting blood, and all food taken; ulceration of stomach; hot, sour eructations; frothy vomiting; gnawing pain; distension of stomach, with a constant commotion; burning in stomach and abdomen, ameliorated by lying on the stomach.
In the abdomen there is great pain, distension, flatulence or dropsy; sore to touch; diarrhoea, thin, bloody or pure blood; profuse bleeding from piles; chronic diarrhoea.
Copious watery urine. It has cured diabetes, with sugar in the urine or without, where there is great thirst, weakness and pallor and loss of flesh.
Weakness with seminal losses; relaxed genitals and swollen feet.
Uterine haemorrhage; copious menses, or watery menstrual flow; scanty menses with chlorosis.
Weakness of larynx; croup; diphtheria. It .has cured many cases of laryngeal diphtheria; hoarseness, with pale mucous membranes; chronic dry, hacking cough in sickly, pale persons, such as have inherited phthisis, with oedema of extremities, diarrhoea and dyspnoea, or night sweats ; haemorrhage from the lungs ; burning in chest and stomach; rattling in chest; chronic bronchitis.
Weakness and lameness in extremities, with swelling, rheumatic or oedematous; dropsy of limbs, with diarrhoea.
It is a deep-acting, constitutional remedy, and when well studied will be very useful. All substances abused as food become great remedies, such as vinegar, coffee, common salt, etc. We should look to them oftener than we do for the stubborn chronic cases.


ACTAEA RACEMOSA (BLACK COHOSH)
This remedy has been only meagerly proved, yet there are a few useful points in it. From its proving we can perceive that it is similar to diseased states in the human family, and especially in women, namely, hysterical and rheumatic conditions. The patient is always chilly, easily affected by cold, sensitive to cold and damp weather, which rouses the rheumatic state and develops a state of rheumatism not only in the muscles and joints all over the body, but also along the course of nerves. In the general nervous disturbance there is a lack of will balance, or great disturbance in the voluntary system, which is the underlying feature of hysteria, the symptoms are intermingled with rheumatism. With the pains we have soreness all over the body. Trembling, numbness, jerking of muscles. Inability to exercise the will over the muscles of the body, turmoil in the voluntary system, with stiffness.
Tendency to take cold and thereby she takes on sensitiveness in the glands and larger organs, such as the liver and uterus. Complaints in these organs come on from cold damp weather (Dulcamara) and from being chilled. The patient is sensitive to cold in all parts except the head, and is aggravated from becoming cold both in parts of the body and in general. The headaches, however, are better in the open air and from cold, which is an exception and a particular, for the general feature is aggravation from cold.
There is a terrible mental state that alternates with physical states. It is an overwhelming sadness or gloominess, she is bowed down with sorrow. Sits and mopes in great sadness, like Psorinum and Pulsatilla. This may pass off instantly, or be brought on and aggravated from motion, from fear, from excitement, from taking cold. Very commonly there is muscular soreness, a bruised feeling all over, with drawing and jerking. This will let up very suddenly and leave a nervous, hysterical girl in a state of sadness, and she will sit and say nothing. When questioned perhaps she will break into tears or express in various ways the overwhelming sadness. With the headache there is marked sadness. Changeable moods. The physical and the mental are all the time changing. Other symptoms alternate and change. The jerking has made physicians see the resemblance to chorea in these hysterio-rheumatic constitutions. The rheumatism will change in a day into chorea, and again the choreic movements will keep on with the soreness throughout the muscles of the body. The jerking and soreness and numbness often keep on together.
There are certain features about the chorea that should be noted. Jerking of the muscles when in a state of emotion or from becoming chilled. If any part of the body is pressed upon jerking of the muscles of that part will take place. One of these nervous, rheumatic, hysterical subjects may not have chorea constantly, but as soon as she retires at night the whole of the side lain on will commence to jerk and prevent her from going to sleep. If she turns on the back the muscles of the back and shoulders will jerk and prevent sleep. She turns over on the other side, but after a little while the muscles pressed on commence to jerk. All this time she has become so restless and nervous that she is driven to distraction. The mind is full of all sorts of imaginations, and the body is full of all sorts of uneasiness, because she can find no place to rest upon. Sometimes the muscles are so sore that they cannot be lain upon for any length of time; sometimes it is a numbness, sometimes a jerking. These things are queer, but they belong to the patient, affecting not one part, but the whole economy.
Full of fear, anguish and restlessness. Fear of death, excitement, suspicious. "Will not even take the medicine because there is something wrong about it." It has a mania such as occurs in nervous, hysterical women, and it has cured puerperal mania. Puerperal mania from taking cold during or soon after confinement. The remedy belongs especially to women, because its symptoms are so commonly associated with the affections of women. Mental states following the disappearance of rheumatism is a strong feature. The rheumatism gets better, but the mental state becomes worse. Sometimes the rheumatism disappears in short order and the mind is not disturbed, but then it is because a diarrhoea - has come on, with great soreness and aching in the bowels, or because a flow from the uterus has given relief. There must be some relief or a disturbance will take place like Abrotanum. Some flow must be established, and hence the menstrual flow or diarrhoea gives relief; otherwise the mind takes on trouble, the patient becomes gloomy, or has a low form of mental excitement. One of the symptoms is quite descriptive of this sadness I have referred to: "Sensation as if a black cloud had settled all over her," while at the same time it weighed like "lead upon the head." This is entirely figurative. It can all be expressed in the word "sadness." We will find "melancholy," "gloominess," "low spirited," etc., running all through our text, but the word "sadness" is just as broad as any of them.
The headaches are rheumatic. "Sore, bruised feeling all over the head. Bruised sensation in the occiput. Sore, bruised feeling in the top of the head, as if the top of the head would fly off." "As if cold air was blowing upon the brain." Yet most of these headaches are better by being in the cold air. "Headache brought on from catching cold, from the weather changes, cold, damp weather." There are many headaches. Pressing headache. Many of the headaches are intense, and described as if a bolt were extending down into the back of the neck. Soreness in the back of the neck. Pain in the back of the neck. Hysterical girls; they have much pain in the back of the neck. With the headache the eyeballs are very sore, "painful to turn in any direction." "Pain in the eyes, bruised pain in the head."
"Soreness in the abdomen; sore and bruised. Alternate diarrhoea and constipation. Alternation of diarrhoea and physical complaints."
We pass now to the female genitalia, which form a center for a great deal of trouble in the remedy. A routine saying about Actaea is that it makes confinement easy. That is not a legitimate saying concerning any remedy, and such expressions encourage routine practice. It is true that when this remedy has been given to pregnant women in accordance with its symptoms it has proved capable of making confinement easy. But the way it has been given has been the routine practice of giving it in the tincture or in the 2d or 3d, until the patient was under its influence even when it was not indicated, as it was not similar to the case. But the homoeopathic physician never practices in this way. A remedy fits a general condition when the symptoms of that general condition are found in the remedy. Remember that it does so because all the symptoms agree.
"Pain in the uterine region, darting from side to side. Bearing down and pressing out." These bearing down sensations, taken with all the other states that relate to the patient in general, show that it is a very useful remedy in prolapsus of the uterus. It has the relaxation of the parts. Do not suppose that our remedies are not sufficient to cure these conditions, when the symptoms agree. It is true that remedies will cure prolapsus when the symptoms agree, and at no other time. If it fits the patient in general, these bearing down sensations will go away, the patient will be made comfortable, and an examination will finally show that the parts arc in normal condition. You cannot prescribe for the prolapsus; you must prescribe for the woman. You cannot prescribe for one symptom, because there are probably fifty remedies that have that symptom.
There are menstrual disorders in these hysterical rheumatic constitutions. Irregularity of the menstrual flow. It may be copious, suppressed or scanty. Severe pain all through the flow. The more the flow the greater the pain. That is very peculiar. Generally the flow will relieve pain, but with this remedy the pain is during the flow. Generally the most severe and most painful attack is at the beginning of the flow, and with some women again just after the flow has ceased. Each woman is a law unto herself. In this remedy the sufferings are during the menstrual flow as a rule. The most severe mental symptoms, the most severe rheumatic symptoms, the most extreme jerking and cramping of the limbs and sleeplessness are during the menstrual flow. During menses, epileptic spasms. All sorts of sufferings in the nerves. Soreness along the course of the nerves, soreness in the muscles or joints during the flow. Increase of mental symptoms. Cold and chilly, must be wrapped up. "Rheumatism. Dysmenorrhoea." "Soreness in the uterus and ovarian region. Lame, bruised feeling all over; painful menstruation," and someone has named that rheumatic dysmenorrhoea, not a bad name.
Many symptoms during pregnancy. It cures all sorts of conditions in this kind of constitution, these nervous, rheumatic, fidgety women, with jerking in the muscles. So markedly do her troubles alternate with each other that alternation is in the nature of her case. You will commonly find that all the rest of her troubles have passed away, and that now nausea has come on. In all the years past she has had a hysterical constitution, but now when she is pregnant she has nausea all the time. You will find when one set of symptoms becomes extremely severe others have temporarily subsided, and so they change about like Pulsatilla. But the symptoms have to be taken collectively to get at the image of the patient. A woman will come to you with one group of symptoms today and may come back to you with an entirely different group in a couple of weeks. These are very troublesome cases to prescribe for, and you have sometimes to take the symptoms a dozen times and put them all together as if she had felt them all in one day, and so make your prescription. A hysterical patient is difficult to manage because of this changing of symptoms, and also because she has a tendency to deceive the doctor.
"Shivering in the first stage of labor. Hysterical manifestations through labor." Pains have all ceased or are irregular, so that they do no good. No dilatation has taken place. But when the regular pains come on we have some important symptoms. A pain conies on and it seems to be about to finish satisfactorily; it has been regular and prolonged until about two-thirds through, and all at once she screams out and grasps her hip the pain has left the uterus and gone to the hip, causing a cramp in the hip, and she has to be rubbed and turned over. This medicine will regulate the pains, and when the next pain comes it will hold on to the end. So impressionable is this woman during confinement that if she is subjected to any emotion such as having an emotional story told in the room or if anything excitable occurs, the pain will stop. If she has passed through the labor and the lochia has been established, from such a cause the lochia will stop, as if she had taken cold, and she will have cramps and troublesome after-pains, the milk will be suppressed, she will feel sore and bruised all over, and have fever. This remedy should be compared with Caulophyllum, which has the following symptoms: Weakness in the reproductive system of the woman. From weakness she is sterile, or she aborts in the early months of gestation. During parturition the contractions of the uterus are too feeble to expel the contents, and they are only tormenting. Labor-like pains during menstruation with drawing pains in the thighs and legs, and even the feet and toes. Uterine haemmorrhage from inertia of the uterus. Relaxation of muscles and ligaments. Heaviness, and even prolapsus. Subinvolution. Excoriating leucorrhoea. Menses too soon or too late. She is sensitive to cold and wants warm clothing-quite unlike Pulsatilla. She is hysterical, like Ignatia. She is fretful and apprehensive. She is rheumatic, like Actaea, only the small joints are most likely to be affected. Later she suffers from after-pains, and they are felt in the inguinal region. Rheumatic stiffness of the back and very sensitive spine. She is sleepless, restless and withal very excitable. This remedy has cured chorea at puberty when menstruation was late.
You need not be surprised that such an emotional subject has a fluttering, quick pulse, and irregular action of the heart, but many of the most marked hysterical features are present without any disturbances whatever in the action of the heart. "A feeling in the region of the heart as if the heart were sore, and as if it were enlarged."
"Back of head and neck sore." The head is drawn back from contraction of the muscles at the nape. Violent aching down the back. Rheumatism in the back. Impossible to lie upon the back because of the contraction of the muscles of the back. Impossible to lie upon the side of the body because of the contraction and jerking of the muscles. "Numbness of the limbs. Trembling. Soreness."
The symptoms of the nerves are simply a reiteration of what I have said. "Hysterical spasms. Convulsions. Trembling of the legs; hardly able to walk." The numbness is such as is associated: with paralysis. Paralytic weakness.
The best effects have resulted from the 30th, 200th, i000th and still higher potencies, and from the use of medicine in single doses.
It is similar in some of its conditions to the Blue Cohos
ASAFOETIDA
This remedy in olden times was frequently abused for man and beast. Our grandfathers supposed it was a protection against disease, and hence they used it in the stables. Lumps of "foety," as they called it, were put in the corn for the horse, to keep off distemper. What it has accomplished I am unable to say, but it is certain that these farmers looked upon Asafoetida as a great protective against disease. It has been used also by the laity as a medicine for fainting, for hysteria, and all sorts of nervous symptoms and complaints. This use is justified by the proving. These things are scarcely worthy of note, but it shows the general use among the people, as a domestic medicine, in crude form. It has been used more extensively in this form than in professional practice in a legitimate way.
There is one class of patients you will find who will trouble you. Those cases that come into your office with puffed, venous, purple faces; they have an appearance of plethora; the face looks puffed, bloated and dropsical at times; it is a dark red, dusky face; such a face we shall cure sometimes with Asafoetida. Carbo an., Aurum, Carbo veg. and Pulsatilla are also related to this kind of face, but it is a very troublesome face, it shows more or less cardiac disturbance and venous stasis. The venous side of the heart will often be involved, or be about to be involved, when you have this kind of face. I never like to see them come into my office, for they are hard cases to manage. They have deep-seated troubles, with bleeding, they are subject to sudden inflammations, and they do not rally quickly. In this constitution we have ulcerations; a little place will ulcerate and suppurate, and the ulceration will burrow; this is just what this remedy does. Another thing this kind of constitution will do is to set up an inflammatory condition of the periosteum with swelling, periostitis of the tibia for instance, where the circulation is not very active; inflammation of cartilages with tumefaction and purple skin, stitching pains and dropsy, ulcerations and fistulous openings. This medicine is good for just such states. "Ulcers with extreme sensitiveness."
Patients often say, "I get no sympathy when I am sick because I look so well;" fat, flabby and purple. This remedy will seldom be thought of in lean persons; they seem to be free from complaints like those of Asafoetida, but in fat, flabby persons, extremely nervous, extremely sensitive to pain, full of hysteria. Purple when out in the cold, purple when excited. In other words, you see before you the venous constitution, and these people get the worst kind of hysteria; they go off accost from no cause into fainting; from a close room, from excitement, from any disturbance; sometimes cramps come on, but more especially fainting. They are subject to stitching pains from the bone to the surface; that is, from within out. The periosteum becomes irritated, and glands become swollen. Syphilis sometimes produces this kind of condition. Vascular disturbances in the body; periostitis, necrosis, induration of glands, nerve syphilis and head pains. In old syphilitics with this kind of venous face, subject to bleeding, ulcers turn black or become purple. In this there is a similarity to Lachesis. Old scars turn purple, threaten to suppurate, take on a venous aspect, become painful and turn black. Ulcers form at the site of old scars in old syphilitic patients and sometimes in psoric patients. Most complaints come on during rest and are better by slow motion.
There is another grand feature running through this remedy; it is full of discharges, catarrhal discharges, discharges from ulcers, watery discharges from different places, and even watery stool; and all these discharges are horribly offensive and ichorous. Deep, flat ulcers from bone and periosteal affections give out a watery, bloody discharge that is horribly offensive, with pains shooting outwards. Get the idea of the venous stasis well fixed in your mind and with this syphilitic state added to it.
There are many pains running through the remedy and they are night pains like those of syphilis, nightly bone pains, and pains in the periosteum. The ulcers are deep, with bluish edges. Varicose veins surround the ulcers. Inflammation of the bone and periosteum, with blueness all around the ulcers. When there has been an inflammatory condition of the periosteum, somewhat passive in character, the skin adheres to the bone, glues down to it by adhesion. It is too feeble to ulcerate, it does not get up a lively inflammation, but only a passive state. The glands all over the body are hot and throbbing, with shooting, jerking pains, in syphilis or old psoric and scrofulous complaints.
The bone pains that are felt in the head are sometimes very distressing. Old syphilitic bone pains in the head, stitching, penetrating. It seems where there are lumps and nodules, about the head, this medicine seems to hurry things. Shooting, stitching, tearing pains under left frontal eminence. This stitching pain is sometimes described as if a nail or plug were driven into the head. These nervous headaches are syphilitic, hysterical or scrofulous; hysterical pains described as rending, tearing, sticking. All over the head there is stitching pain, but in the frontal eminence, in the temples, there is a sensation as if a nail or plug were driven in, and most of the pains seem to bore, as if they extended from the bone to the surface, and hence are said to be from within out.
It is useful in old syphilitics who are subject to eye complaints, ulcers on the eyeball, ulcers on the cornea, ameliorated in the open air, with a sensation of numbness in the eyes; inflammation of the iris, with ragged appearance of the iris; they are subject also to severe, sharp stitching pains that come from within out. The remedy is full of burning, and so the eyeballs burn, better in the open air. Iritis, but the inflammation sometimes involves the choroid, the retina, and mucous membrane, making a general inflammatory condition of syphilitic character. There are tearing pains in various places around the eyes; sticking, stitching pains, worse at night. Ulcers, with stitching pains, worse at night. Burning, stitching in the eyes with dryness, so that the lids stick to the balls of the eyes, pain worse at night. There is a misty appearance before the eyes, dullness as if looking through a fog. It also seems as if the atmosphere were filled with little floating black flies. "Muscae voliantes." You have looked into the air and seen little gnats and mosquitoes; well it appears to these patients as if these were there when they are not there. The discharge from the eyes is ichorous, bloody and often offensive.
This same syphilitic miasm may attack the ear and the bones of the ear. These bones may decay and the hearing be lost. "Burning in the ear with discharge of foetid pus." Stitching pains in the ears front within out.
A horribly offensive discharge comes from the nose; ulcers high up in the nose; caries of the bones of the nose; syphilitic ozaena. Putrid old catarrhs. "Feeling as if the nose stopped high up, as if he could not breathe through it, with fullness of the head, when riding in a carriage." (Aurum, Aurum mur.)
Numbness is a great feature of this remedy, numbness of the scalp, or deep in the head; numbness here and there; numb, dead feeling associated with the pain; numbness after pain; often numbness after sleep. Other nervous manifestations occur besides those that are hysterical. It has choreic motions. You would expect such a peculiar nervous constitution to have almost everything among its nervous symptoms. "Constantly chewing and working frothy slime out of mouth, with swollen tongue." "Speech unintelligible." "Grinding of teeth; starting at night." Swelling of the lips, and of the whole buccal mucous membrane, especially the lower lip, with burning in the mouth.
There are syphilitic symptoms in the throat, attended with the usual burning, darting, stitching in ulcers pain when swallowing; a sensation of a ball rising in the throat, such as occurs in globus hystericus; choking, must constantly swallow. Hysterical and choreic affections of the Esophagus and trachea. Spasms of the Esophagus. This lump in the throat, or suffocation, is a sort of hysterical spasm of the Esophagus. "Dryness and burning in the Esophagus."
In the stomach troubles, if you have ever seen a typical case of Asafoetida, you will wonder where all the air comes from; it comes up in volumes. "Hiccough-like contractions of the diaphragm." Choreic jerkings of the diaphragm, with expulsion of wind like the sound of a pop-gun going off almost every second. It is a condition that the patient has no control over. It is like the shooting off of little guns forcing loud belching, loud eructations of wind from the stomach. There are a few symptoms mentioned in the text just here that are worthy of note. "Pulsation in pit of stomach; perceptible to sight and touch." "Pressing, cutting, stitching pains." A queer observation has been made that flatus was not passed downward, but all upwards. "Eructations; smelling like garlic; tasting rancid, sharp or putrid." Always horribly offensive. Offensiveness is a characteristic of the remedy. And then there is a "gone empty feeling in the pit of the stomach," not a pain. "Pulsations after eating." "Meteorism of the stomach." The remedy has many gastric and abdominal complaints; full of bellyache; stitching pains, colic. The diarrhoea is more or less troublesome. These patients are afflicted with diarrhoea from the slighest indigestion, after any indiscretion in diet, a painful, watery diarrhoea. "Liquid stools of most disgusting smell." "Blackish-brown papescent offensive stools, which relieve."
"Bearing down in genitals, worse when riding in a carriage." "Uterine ulcer sensitive and painful." This medicine has been very useful in palliating uterine cancer in such constitutions as described; those with purple faces, never the very pallid ones. Women of feeble, flabby, venous constitutions are subject to haemorrhages and miscarriages. Women who are not pregnant sometimes have the breasts fill up with milk, a wonderfully annoying thing, and 'but few remedies have it; this is one of the few. It has also deficiency of milk. "Ten days after delivery milk diminished."
These patients sometimes get hysterical asthma; all sorts of disturbance in breathing, dyspnoea. "Asthmatic feeling in trachea." "Asthmatic attacks at least once a day all her life, brought on by every bodily exertion, coition, especially by every satisfying meal." Attacks of dyspnoea after coition, like Ambra. "Obstinate titillating cough at night." Many of these complaints are worse at night; nightly aggravations. Syphilitic complaints are commonly worse at night and such antisyphilitic remedies as Mercurius, Staphisagria, Hepar, Nitric acid, etc., are all worse at night. Among the other chest complaints, I will read a few of those that are marked here prominently and are striking ones. "Pressure and burning under the sternum." "Compression of chest as from a heavy weight." "Stitches in chest." "Single, violent stitches from within outward, at short intervals."
This remedy is full of rheumatism and gouty symptoms; gouty affections in general, in nervous constitutions. When such a nervous constitution finally produces gouty formations, the nervousness often disappears, for it has been relieved by the deposit in the joints; a transformation scene has taken place.
AURUM MURIATICUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This remedy exercises a profound action upon the mind and body. The patients suffering from latent syphilis are over-sensitive to it, and often require it in their complaints. It has many bone symptoms and pains and they are worse at night. Its catarrhal condition is very much like that found in old cases of syphilis, such as had long treatment with Mercury and Iodides It is a rheumatic constitution also and is useful in acute and chronic rheumatism. It has cured rheumatic fever where the joints have been mostly affected but are now better and the heart is the principal seat of suffering. Many complaints are associated with cardiac disease. Dropsical states from heart disease, from liver affections, with albumin in the urine after scarlet fever or with intermittent fever. Where old syphilitics continue to lose flesh. The glands and parts inflamed become indurated. It has been useful in cancerous glands. Inflammation of the bone and periosteum; caries, exostosis after Mercury in latent syphilis. Caries of the joints with nightly boring and gnawing pains. It has burning pains in many parts. The pains are tearing, drawing, pressing and stitching. Many symptoms come on during rest and some during motion. Cold, wet weather ameliorates. Warm air, warm bed, warm room, warm wraps, becoming warm even in open air, and warmth in general aggravates the general feeling. Exertion and walking increase many symptoms. The palpitation, suffocation and great weakness come from walking and exertion. While open air ameliorates he is even in the open air incapable of exertion. Fast walking is impossible. The nervous symptoms are very marked. Excitement, sensitive to noise, starting when spoken to, starting in sleep. When the above symptoms are concomitants of heart and liver diseases this remedy will most likely be useful. Fullness of the veins all over the body is a strong feature of this remedy. It is a most useful remedy in patients suffering from the chronic effects of gonorrhoea and syphilis, where fig warts and syphilitic ulceration are present together.
The mental symptoms are largely such as are found in Aurum. It has the same suicidal disposition. His mind dwells upon his broken health until he becomes low-spirited and desires death. He loathes his life. Weeping and aversion to his occupation. Indolence. The melancholia of old syphilitics. Extremely anxious with palpitation.
Said to be "full of whims and notions." Extremely irritable. ,Nothing can be done to please him. Constant fretting. Extreme mental and physical restlessness. He walks the streets slowly, to be in the open air which ameliorates; he is much worse in the house, and in the warm room. Thinking about his complaint caused the heart to beat strong and fast. Symptoms worse after fright, vexation and mortification. When the general symptoms mentioned above strongly predominate it will cure the particulars in the various parts below.
It cures violent syphilitic headaches with vertigo. Violent left-sided headaches. Intense ache in forehead. Burning in occiput. Cerebral congestion. Pulsating in the head. Pain ameliorated by cold application. His forehead is hot. Heat of the head and cold extremities. Great soreness of the periosteum and exostoses of the skull. Tearing pains in the skull. Worse nights.
It cures chronic eye troubles due to syphilis. The mucous membrane of the lids and ball is red, thickened and very vascular. The lids stick together in the morning. Dim vision in the evening by artificial light. Loss of vision after syphilis, and after scarlet fever. Very slow accommodation. Amaurosis, chronic inflammation of margin of lids. Burning pain in the eyes.
Buzzing, ringing and roaring in the cars followed by deafness. A sensation as if the ears were wide open. Music relieves the ear symptoms. Eczema behind the ears. Burning and itching behind the ears at night.
It is one of the-most useful remedies for catarrh of the nose in patients who are sensitive to the warm room. It classes with Pulsatilla and Kali sulphuricum, as both of these are better in the open air. The discharges of the remedy are thin or thick like pus, very offensive and sometimes bloody, and there are many hard crusts in the nose. Bleeding of the nose on blowing out of the crusts. Yellow, greenish discharge. It cures the most stubborn syphilitic catarrh. The nasal bones become sensitive to pressure. Caries of the bones of the nose. Red, swollen nose. Deep cracks about the wings of the nose. Lupus of the wings of the nose. Infants with inherited syphilis with snuffles and indented nose.
The circumscribed red face with pallor of face and neck in heart complaint, palpitation on slight exertion, pressure behind the sternum when walking, suffocates in a close room, wants cool air, ameliorated by gentle motion and we have a combination that this remedy often cures. The pale face with red spot on each cheek is not that which is found in consumption, but in heart complaint. The infant's face looks old. Acne on the face. There is often a red, healthy look on the face of very sickly people. Red faced from venous stasis; it is a false plethora, like that described in Aurum. Caries of the lower jaw like Phosphorus and exostosis of right cheek bone. Burning and swelling of the lips. Indurated lips. Cancerous ulcer of the lips. Painful swelling of the submaxillary gland.
It has been useful in cancer of the tongue. Inflammation of the tongue followed by induration. Dry, red, excoriated tongue. Warts on the tongue. Metallic taste and salivation.
Pains in the throat and ulceration. Ulceration of the tonsils. Inflammation with dryness in throat.
The stomach is very weak and digestion is slow. Nausea, distension and diarrhoea after eating. Coffee, tea and wine disagree. Eructations putrid. Nausea in the morning, better after breakfast. Vomiting of green fluid. Gastritis, cramps in stomach. Sharp pains in the stomach with burning, intense thirst.
Enlargement of liver and spleen. Chronic inflammation of the liver. The liver is large and hard. Burning in the liver. Tight feeling in the region of the liver. Liver troubles associated with heart disease with albumin in the urine and dropsy of the limbs.
Abdominal dropsy. Drawing pains and distension from gases. Great tenderness of abdomen.
Frequent fluid stools, grayish, white, bileless. Diarrhoea with liver affection, or with Bright's disease. Diarrhoea worse at night. Haemorrhoids with bleeding at stool. A heavy ring of warts around the anus with copious moisture. Marked excoriation around the anus. It has cured fistula in ano. Fig warts of the anus with ulceration.
Frequent urination day and night, but worse during the night. Urine dribbles. Increased flow of urine. Urine turbid, reddish sediment. Gonorrhoea in old syphilitic subjects where they have been badly treated. Chancre on the prepuce and scrotum. Fig warts on the penis, scrotum or anus. Bubo in left groin. Surceased sexual desire. Induration of testes.
Enlargement and great hardness of uterus. Indurated cervix. Chronic inflammation of uterus and ovaries. Menses frequent and profuse, flow excoriating. Leucorrhoea copious, yellow. Uterus prolapsed and heavy. Inflammation of vagina and labia. Gonorrhoea and swelling of glands in the groin. Heat, burning and itching of the vagina and labia.
Suffocation in a warm room, from the clothing, from ascending stairs and from walking fast. Dyspnoea at night. Dry paroxysmal cough at night. Heart cough. Loose cough with thick yellow expectoration. Most distressing pressure under the sternum as if it would burst on walking fast, ascending steps or on any exertion, with palpitation. Palpitation on exertion- and from excitement. Palpitation if suddenly spoken to. Sharp pains in the chest, going from place to place. Pain in the heart. Drawing and cutting in the heart. Violent pressure in the region of the heart Cardiac anguish. Angina pectoris. Endo-carditis. Enlarged right side of the heart. The palpitation keeps her from sleeping. Rheumatic heart Palpitation from mental exertion. Pulse small, weak and fast. The heart is feeble. Pulsation strong in neck and temples. Violent, irregular heart.
Trembling of the hands in the morning. Shocks in the arms. Burning, shooting pains in the forearms. Drawing in the shoulders. Worse in the warm bed and during rest. Tearing pains in the shoulders. Stiffness of arms and fingers.
Dropsical swelling of the lower limbs. Exostoses on the tibia. Periostitis of the labia. Extreme sensitiveness of the tibia. Pain in leg at night. Burning feet. Pain in feet worse from warmth and motion. Cutting in the toes when walking. Burning, redness and swelling of the toes. Limbs cold and covered with a cold sweat. Drawing, tearing in all the limbs. Venous engorgement of the lower limbs.
Sleeplessness from palpitation and from excitement, wakes with a start. Violent dreams, tormenting dreams of sadness.
BAPTISIA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Baptisia is suitable for acute diseases. It is principally a short-acting medicine, suitable for complaints that are not long lasting. So far as we know it is not an antipsoric, does not go deep into the life. All of its acute diseases and complaints have the appearance of zymosis, like scarlet fever, diphtheria, typhoid, and gangrenous complaints. There is one thing that is unusual about it, it brings on this septic state more rapidly than most other remedies. The zymotic complaints of Ars., Phos., Rhus, and Bry., are much slower in the pace. But Baptisia is suitable for typhoids that come on rapidly, and hence it is not so often suitable in idiopathic typhoids. When an individual comes down suddenly from cold, from malaria, from drinking poisonous waters, and from any zymotic or septic cause he is hurled into bed in a few days, instead of going through a period of four, five or six weeks. The old idiopathic typhoid fevers come on slower.
Baptisia is suitable for those blood poisons that are highly septic, such as the puerperal state, such as scarlet fever. He comes down perhaps with the appearance of a sudden violent break down, with a remittent fever. But all at once it turns continued, and takes on septic symptoms. So much for its progress and its pace. Every medicine must be observed as to its velocity, as to its pace, as to its periodicity, as to its motion, and its wave. We get that by looking at the symptoms. You take an individual who has been down in a mine, in the swamp, down in the mud, in the sewers, who has inhaled foul gases, who goes into bed with a sort of stupor, from the very beginning he feels stupid. It is not gradual, but he goes down very suddenly, and he is stupid. He is prostrated. His face is mottled. Sordes begin to appear on the teeth much earlier than in the regular typhoid. The abdomen becomes distended much earlier than in a regular typhoid; that is, one who is accustomed to observing those things knows they are postponed for a number of days; while with this remedy the third day the abdomen is distended, his mouth is bleeding, and is putrid. His odors are horrible; and he is in a marked state of delirium, such as would not be expected until the typhoid is out for many days. So it has rapid running diseases. It has velocity. That is, he is going down toward death rapidly. He is increasing in his prostration more rapidly than usual. It is not a gradual decline of days and weeks. He goes into a state of stupor. When aroused he takes on delirium. It does not matter whether it is scarlet fever, or typhoid fever, or a septic surgical fever, or a puerperal fever, or what. He has fever, and if you look at him, and talk to him, and turn him over, and rouse him up, and make him realize that you want to say something to him â€which is difficultâ€ he gives you the impression that he has been on a big drunk. That is the first thought you will have in a Baptisia case. His countenance is besotted. It is bloated and purple and mottled. Blood oozes from the mouth. You have seen the besotted countenance of drunkards, and it is like an old drunkard.
His mind seems to be gone. He does not know what he is talking about. He is in confusion, and when aroused he attempts to say something, and utters a word or two and it all flits away, and he is back in his state of stupor again. No matter what disease that comes in, no matter what inflammation is present, no matter what organ is inflamed, if that state of the blood that can give rise to such symptoms and such sepsis is present, if that state of the mind is present, it is Baptisia.
All of the discharges are putrid. The odor is cadaverous, pungent; penetrating. His perspiration, if he has any, is sour, foetid, pungent, and penetrating. If he has no sweat the body gives off an odor that is unaccountable. The odor is so penetrating that on going into the front door the whole house, if the room is open, is filled with the odor. The odor from the stool is putrid and so penetrating that it can be detected on first going into the house.
Now, a strange thing that runs through the remedy is a peculiar kind of mental confusion, in which he is in a constant argument: with his parts. He seems to feel that there are two of him. He realizes a dual existence whenever he is roused up. He will begin talking about the other one in bed with -him. It is said clinically that "his great toe is in controversy with his thumb." Or, "one leg is talking to the other leg." Or, one part is talking to another part; or, he is scattered around over the bed; fumbles and you ask him what he is trying to do "why, he is trying to get those pieces together." He never succeeds; he is in delirium, of course. These are only examples; you will get a new phase every time you get a Baptisia case. Most of the time he is unconscious except when roused. Sometimes mutters. You will see his lips go, and you rouse him to see what he is about, and he is trying to get the pieces together. "Confused as if intoxicated." There are stages when he is not quite so stupid, and he is sleepless and restless. That is the exception. Most generally you will find him lying upon one side curled up like a dog, and he does not want to be disturbed. Again, when the stupor is not so great he is restless and turns and tosses. In that case he cannot sleep, because he cannot get the pieces together. He feels if he could once get matters together he could go to sleep, and these parts that are talking to each other keep him awake. His mind wanders as soon as his eyes are closed. Dullness, especially at night. Indisposition to think. Mind seems weak. There you find the whole picture of the mental aspect in all complaints, in all acute diseases, but they all come on in a hurry. They are zymotic, of a low form such as scarlet fever, such as malignant diseases; and yet it takes on a continued type of fever. These patients will die in from ten to twelve days if let alone. Whereas, ordinary typhoid will run for weeks, and sometimes die at the close of four weeks in a crisis. The bleedings are black and offensive. The putridity is marked. In the mouth, the mucus from the throat and nose is bloody and putrid. It has a diarrhoea. Thin, fecal, watery, yellow. It has a typical typhoid discharge; the most typical typhoid stool is like yellow corn-meal mush, coming on many times a day, but soft, pappy, just about the consistency of soft mush. This remedy has that stool, but it is not the commonest form, but the black, the brown, the dark. In treating a good many cases of typhoid it was my fortune to observe a large number of Baptisia cases, which the remedy cured promptly. The stool where the Baptisia did the most service was like ground up slate, slate colored, brownish. The odor was penetrating. In addition to that I have seen this medicine cure that kind of diarrhoea when it was slate colored, even thin as water, if it was horribly putrid like decomposed meat; like the cadaver, attended with great prostration, I have seen it cure that diarrhoea when there were none of the elements of typhoid fever present. A simple prostrating form of diarrhoea. Exhaustion. Exhaustion comes rapidly. In three days he has a deathly sinking coming over him.
The headaches are nondescript. Only those congestive attacks, frontal headaches, violent pains in the head, and especially in the occiput, such as occur in the low forms of disease. I hardly ever go into the details of headaches. Baptisia is not a headache remedy. It is not a remedy that we would single out to treat headaches with, except such violent pains in the head of a congestive character that are associated with this low form of fever.
It has characteristic eye symptoms. Congestion. Redness. Pains in the eyes, and back of the eyes. So it has with hearing. So it has with nasal symptoms. But associated with fevers. But as soon as we come to the face we begin to realize the Baptisia symptoms, that besotted expression. The countenance shows that. The eyes show it, the face shows it. And these are the symptoms: "Dark red with besotted appearance. Hot and perceptibly flushed; dusky." That tells the whole story. Burning; heat in the face. "Critical sweat on forehead and face. Anxious, frightened look." On rousing from sleep looks as if he had a horrible dream.
And then comes the mouth, and the teeth, and the throat, and the tongue, all show marked Baptisia features. The tongue is swollen, painful, offensive. Covered with black blood. Raw; denuded. Stiff and dry as leather. Described as if it was made of wood, or burnt leather; ulcerated. Ulceration runs all through the remedy. Aphthous patches. These little ulcers that start no bigger than a pin-head become black and are so offensive and run together so that the whole surface of the mouth will be in a state of ulceration; raw and denuded, oozing a thick saliva that is putrid. The throat takes on ulceration; is raw and bleeding. There may be diphtheritic exudations in the throat. But round about it there are those low, dark, offensive surfaces. The throat is greatly swollen, and it is with difficulty that he can swallow. Baptisia has been a very useful remedy in gangrenous sore mouth and sore throat. "Cancrum oris." The ulcers spread rapidly and eat rapidly.
They are really phagedenic. Sordes form rapidly on the teeth. And when he is roused from sleep after a few hours of stupor there is a building up on the lips and around the corners of the mouth ridges of dry blood; very offensive. Bleeds much from the mouth, throat and nose. Thick oozing. Putrid. "Tongue red, and dry in the middle. The roof of the mouth swollen and feels numb. Foul or bitter nauseous taste in the mouth. Tongue of a dark hue. Tongue dry, brown down the center. Tongue covered with a thick, brown crust. Tongue yellowish white, deeply furred." Ulcers all over the mouth. Baptisia has cured the ulcerated sore throat of young mothers, - and nursing sore mouth in children, when the parts become dusky and the ulcers spread, and the mouth is putrid, and prostration is coming on rapidly. The child or the mother is growing weak with great rapidity, is becoming prostrated. Now, all this without fever. Many of these ulcerative states in Baptisia are not attended with fever. It seems sometimes as though there were not life enough to get up a fever. Aphthous appearance in typhoid, in children, and with nursing mothers. Canker sores in the mouth. "Putrid ulceration of the whole buccal cavity." Now, with all this trouble saliva pours into the mouth, is thick and ropy and runs all over the pillow; like we find in Mercury.
The sore throat may be gangrenous. A strong feature of it is that the ulcers are rapid and painless, as if numb, without sensation. But it has a painful sore throat. "Fauces dark red; dark, putrid ulcers; tonsils and parotids swollen. Putrid sore throat. Tonsils and soft palate swollen, not accompanied by pain." Great swelling; great tumefaction; purplish. The darker it is the more likely would I be to think of Baptisia, but never a bright red. I have never seen the Baptisia mental state associated with a bright red appearance. That low form of mental state is associated with blood decomposition, with duskiness, with a dark appearance of the skin, and of the mucous membranes. Not bright red, not pink, as we find in Bell. Bell. is more commonly bright red, although it has duskiness, but nothing to the extent of Baptisia. There is nothing like the putridity in Bell. that there is in Baptisia. "Oesophagus feels as if constricted from above down to stomach." Now, we have another phase of it. From the sore throat the trouble extends into the oesophagus, and the oesophagus is at first in a state of spasm. Later it is paralyzed. Fluids will at first go down the throat, but he cannot swallow a particle of solids. The bolus of food will go into the upper end of the oesophagus and there it chokes him and feels like a lump, and he chokes and struggles and gags and throws it back, and then takes water or fluids. He can swallow fluids but he cannot swallow solids. Every particle of solid food gags; but he can swallow liquids. Natr. mur. and quite a number of other remedies have spasms of the oesophagus coming on with nervous complaints, but in this low state I know of no other medicine having that one symptom, having these features, and the paralysis, and the spasmodic condition of the oesophagus. "The oesophagus feels as if constricted from above down to the stomach." Constrictive feeling causing frequent efforts at deglutition; throat sore, feels constricted. Can swallow only liquids. Children cannot swallow solids. The smallest solid substance causes gagging, thus he cannot use anything but milk; sometimes, thin, watery, offensive passages day and night; associated with putridity, with the offensiveness, with the duskiness and with the prostration. You need to know no more, if it is diphtheria, or scarlet fever, if it is typhoid fever, that will lead you to a certain remedy. "Paralysis of the organs of deglutition." To draw out from every remedy that which is positive, to get the associations that make up a particular remedy, and that only is the duty of every clinician.
The abdomen is distended; the stomach is distended. We may have these symptoms in inflammation of the liver, when this remedy would be useful. Along with the diseases that I have mentioned, tympanitic abdomen. Great soreness in the right iliac-fossa; so sore and tender, no bigger than a fist; but all of this putridity, I am sure, would prevent you from using a knife to cut off that little appendix.
"Foetid, exhausting diarrhoea. Aphthous diarrhoea;" which means that the parts of the anus that roll out are ulcerated, little aphthous patches inside of the margin. "Involuntary diarrhoea." Involuntary urine and stool in these low forms of disease. "Dark brown, mucous and bloody stools. Foetid stools." It has dysentery. After confinement the lochia stops. Great tenderness of the abdomen. All these putrid signs, breaking down of the blood, the appearance of the face, the sudden prostration, suddenly becoming stupid; and add to that the mental symptoms, these are all signs for Baptisia in puerperal fever. Now, intermingled with this after the case has been running on a few days the limbs become helpless and tremulous. The tongue when it is put out is tremulous. The hand when it is raised is tremulous, and the limbs are tremulous. Quivering all over the body. Prostration increases. The jaw drops and he lies upon the back unconscious, with the mouth wide open. He gradually slides down toward the foot of the bed. A peculiar sort of paralytic weakness. This is how the prostration increases with the disease; but even yet when he is as low as this, with the signs present, Baptisia will break that fever. Baptisia will stop the typhoid fever, when it is indicated. Prostration and trembling. Huddles down in bed, feels as if sinking away. Lies in a semiconscious condition when she appears dying. Excessive drowsiness. Delirious stupor. Lies in a semi-comatose state. "Discharges and exhalations foetid." Breath, stool, urine; ulcers; all putrid. Ulceration of mucous membranes.
BENZOIC ACID
Whenever we see in the nature of a remedy a well-defined state and condition of the human system pointed out by certain distinctive groups of symptoms we may know that there is such a diseased state in the human family. They have not the power to create by themselves any diseased state except there is first such a state in the economy of the human race to be aroused. They simply call up in a single individual something that the individual has, and that something belongs to the human race, and so whenever we see a diseased state in the remedy we know that it exists in correspondence to something in the human race. Things are so adjusted that everything is for use. There may be conditions in the human race that we, as yet, know no remedy for. We see certain groups of peculiar symptoms frequently repeat themselves and we know they are representatives of a state of economy, but up to this day we may not have seen in the Materia Medica their counterpart. In medicines we have the exact counterpart for the diseases of the human race.
Now this remedy has a state and condition that is sometimes called the gouty constitution, the uraemic or the lithaemic constitution, and these cases are very difficult to manage, as the state is so persistent. It is one of the manifestations of Psora. These patients suffer more or less from irregularity in the action of the kidneys; sometimes the urine is scanty and then they suffer from bodily complaints; again the urine is copious and then they are relieved of their complaints. They are subject to rheumatic attacks and pains in the joints, showing the gouty constitution, and then they have relief when the urine is copious and heavily laden with deposits; but on comes an attack when they have more or less urine, but it is light in specific gravity, and then they are full of pains; in that way they fluctuate. Now, the young prescriber will sometimes see the patient when he is passing large quantities of uric acid forming the red pepper deposits and he thinks he must stop that; his main idea is to check that one particular thing. But the patient is a great deal better off while he has it. To check it is like suppressing a skin eruption, or restraining any other manifestation of disease.
It will be noticed, as one of the foremost things in this remedy's manifestations, that it has strong smelling urine; the urine is pungent, and it sometimes becomes so strong that it smells like hippuric acid, and so it is said urine smells strong like that of a horse. The odor in this remedy approximates that of hippuric acid.
The complaints, then, of Benzoic acid are such as are changeable, and we know why they are changeable; when the urine is copious and plenty of uric acid is being passed, and the urine is full of deposits, then the patient is at his best; when the urine is scanty or of light specific gravity he suffers from backache and pains in the joints, he suffers from atmospheric changes, is sensitive to cold drafts and to the air; but let the urine start up again, which it does in a sort of alternating way, light urine alternating with heavy urine, and the patient is comfortable again. Then, there are complaints in which the urine smells strong and pungent; this often occurs in children. It is astonishing that these little ones manifest the uric acid diathesis in early life. Mothers often describe it as intensely urinous. It smells like intensified urine; it is not the smell, so much, of decomposed urine nor of foetid urine, but urine intensified. It has cured many times wetting the bed, involuntary urination in sleep, when the bed that has been wetted several times becomes uncleanable. You can smell it almost as quick as you go into the room; the children all smell like urine, strong urine; the house smells like urine. If two or three of these little fellows wet the bed at night, the urine is so strong it tells the story at once.
This medicine needs reproving; details have not been brought out, yet its nature is known. We have a good many medicines having this nature, but this is perhaps as intense as any. This remedy does not, of course, fit all these patients, because it does not fit their special symptoms; but it has the nature or general state which, of course, precedes everything, and when it relates to all the particulars as well it does make wonderful changes.
There are a few mental symptoms. "Inclined to dwell on unpleasant things; if he saw anyone deformed, it made him shudder." Alternation of profound sleep with prolonged periods of wakefulness. In the period of wakefulness, he dwells, during the night, upon all the unpleasant subjects that he can think of. This state alternates with nights of stupid sleep for weeks, and this fluctuates in accordance with the fluctuation of the state of urine. "Sadness." "Anxiety while sweating." "Child cross."
There are many headaches; they are uraemic in character and come in many regions with many details. "Fearful pain in occiput or cerebellum." "Rheumatic pains in head." That is well described, because these headaches of uraemic character take on a similarity to rheumatic pains. "Pain and heat in region of organs of reverence and firmness." "Tearing pain in vertex." The headaches are very numerous; the remedy is full of dull, aching occipital headaches, coming on in the night from change of weather. Pains located in the base of the brain after pains have existed for some time in the joints, and they are passing but little urine. Every time he takes a little cold the urine becomes scanty and he is full of dull aches and pains in the head and especially in the occiput. Perversion of smell. "Sense of smell diminished." "Pain in nasal bones."
Another form of transformation scene takes place in this remedy, when all the gouty symptoms of the body cease and inflammation of the tongue comes on. The pains in the joints cease suddenly from taking cold, from stormy weather and on comes a sudden swelling of the tongue. Mercury also has this state. "Extensive ulcerations of tongue, with deeply chapped or fungoid surfaces." Then, again, peculiar kinds of sore throat take place from this same cause. Sudden stoppage or slacking up of the quantity of urine; it becomes scanty, high coloured, and pungent, smelling like that of a horse (Nitric acid), along with acute inflammation and swelling of the tonsils and throat; inflammation of the tonsils with scanty, strong, pungent urine smelling like that of a horse. Another feature that seems almost like metastasis. Take an individual who is going around with more or less rheumatic aches in the joints; he takes cold and all this ceases, but the next day he comes down with inflammation of the tongue or sore throat, or inflammation of the stomach; so that lie vomits everything he eats. The gout goes to different parts and in this instance it goes to the stomach; and then Benzoic acid, Antimonium crud. or Sanguinaria is likely to be useful. When it goes to the throat or is followed by swelling of the tongue Mercury and Benzoic acid should be thought of. Whenever this gouty condition goes to the stomach, of course it must conform to those symptoms that are in the nature of this remedy. In this remedy we have "loathing, sickness at stomach," "nausea with gagging," "vomiting of a salty substance; bitter."
When we think of Benzoic acid for the stomach symptoms, it is important that we have in mind its whole- nature, how it brings about its complaints and what characterizes a Benzoic acid patient. We would not be able to distinguish from the stomach symptoms alone; we must carry with them the character of the remedy.
It has much disturbance of the liver, and many liver symptoms. As to the bowels, the stool, the rectum, anus and urinary organs, it is very rich in symptoms. Its striking ones I will call your attention to, but remember its migrating, metastatic nature, its complaints going from one part to another, which will accompany these symptoms. "Stools copious, watery." This is true in summer diarrhoea, that has come on suddenly, "excessively offensive." The white stool, like soap-suds, is so strong a symptom that the remedy does not fail to cure even when the gouty constitution is not present. "Excessively offensive, scenting the whole house." "Putrid, bloody." "Watery, light-coloured, very offensive stools (in children)." So we get the idea that the stools are white and that the first passages are like soap-suds, but later the soapy appearance subsides and leaves a white stool. It is well, often, when a stool is passed that is of a light liquid, to bear in mind a few remedies that produce this state and ascertain whether it is like soapsuds or filled with bubbles of air. "Diarrhoea of children." The urinous odor of the body, and especially that peculiarly pungent, intense smell of the urine. "Slightly elevated, wart-like, round surfaces around anus."
The urinary symptoms are too numerous to read. "Foetid urine." "Urine of a very repulsive odor." "Effervescing with hydrochloric acid." The odor is sometimes like hartshorn; it is pungent; these are only efforts to describe the strong smell. "Urine dark brown." It is true that normal urine after standing a while will get a foetid odor, but, in this remedy, that just passed is properly described as being intensely urinous. "Urine contains mucus and pus." "Morbid condition of urine." "Renders urine acid," It says in the text "hippuric acid," but this is a rare condition. "Brown urine smells sour." "Too frequent desire to evacuate bladder." "Nephritic colic." "Urine dark, urinous odor highly intensified." Gouty troubles of the liver; rheumatism; nephritic colic; it has cured such states after gonorrhoea, but it is not much of a gonorrhoeal remedy. When the rheumatic states and these symptoms are present there are more or less pains in the kidney. "Sore pain in the back; burning in the kidney." "Prolapsus uteri with foetid urine." "Retention of urine in infants."
"Asthma with inflammatory rheumatic complaints." "Cough followed by expectoration of green mucus."
The organ that is most commonly affected in these rheumatic complaints is the heart. No organ is so likely to be affected when rheumatism leaves the outermost parts as the heart. Pains in the heart. So in this diathesis, with the strong smelling urine and the gout, we may expect affections of the heart. "Pains change place incessantly." "Palpitation of the heart." The rheumatism, of course, is affecting the heart. "Awakens after midnight with violent pulsations of the heart." Think a moment and you will see in what kind of a case you will need Benzoic acid. The constitution of the remedy comes to mind at once with the heart symptoms, the dyspnoea, pain in the heart with rheumatic symptoms; "cannot go to sleep." Think of the alternation of sleeplessness with sleep; think of the strong urine, of the fluctuating complaints, of the erratic constitution. "Palpitation worse at night." "Rheumatic pains in extremities relieving heart." There we get relief; complaints going back to the extremities with relief to the heart. The heart will relieve when the urine becomes copious or when the rheumatism goes back to the extremities, into the fingers and knees, especially the knees in Benzoic acid. Rheumatism alternating between the extremities and heart. This medicine has cured affections of the heart when the rheumatism has a long time ago disappeared from the extremities and has ever since been affecting the heart; after Benzoic acid has been administered a very good sign of its action is that the extremities become painful and the urine becomes copious; free urine and solids increased; the urine becomes heavy, whereas it was light. "Hard, frequent pulse."
The extremities are full of rheumatic affections. "Lassitude in lower limbs." "Swelling of knee." All gouty affections belong to this remedy. "Gouty concretions." "Nodes on joints." Benzoic acid is often an excellent palliating remedy in old gouty constitutions; they want to be relieved of the pains in their fingers and in the nodes and joints. The fingers crack and are clumsy and painful. But often the pain has been relieved and gone to other parts. This is one among the remedies that will drive the complaints away from the internal organs and generally increase the pain in the extremities, which they will scold about. "Trembling with palpitation of heart." "Extreme weakness; sweat and comatose condition." Note that comatose condition with sweat; the Benzoic acid patient sweats without relief. Copious, exhaustive sweat and profound sleep, but there is no relief. "Awaken with difficulty of breathing." Pulsation all over.
"All sorts of catarrhal states; gouty diathesis, gout with arthritic nodosites, syphilitic rheumatism, etc. These patients are getting low down in the scale of life, the tissues become feeble. Ulcers form upon the skin and mucous membranes.
BENZOIC ACID
Whenever we see in the nature of a remedy a well-defined state and condition of the human system pointed out by certain distinctive groups of symptoms we may know that there is such a diseased state in the human family. They have not the power to create by themselves any diseased state except there is first such a state in the economy of the human race to be aroused. They simply call up in a single individual something that the individual has, and that something belongs to the human race, and so whenever we see a diseased state in the remedy we know that it exists in correspondence to something in the human race. Things are so adjusted that everything is for use. There may be conditions in the human race that we, as yet, know no remedy for. We see certain groups of peculiar symptoms frequently repeat themselves and we know they are representatives of a state of economy, but up to this day we may not have seen in the Materia Medica their counterpart. In medicines we have the exact counterpart for the diseases of the human race.
Now this remedy has a state and condition that is sometimes called the gouty constitution, the uraemic or the lithaemic constitution, and these cases are very difficult to manage, as the state is so persistent. It is one of the manifestations of Psora. These patients suffer more or less from irregularity in the action of the kidneys; sometimes the urine is scanty and then they suffer from bodily complaints; again the urine is copious and then they are relieved of their complaints. They are subject to rheumatic attacks and pains in the joints, showing the gouty constitution, and then they have relief when the urine is copious and heavily laden with deposits; but on comes an attack when they have more or less urine, but it is light in specific gravity, and then they are full of pains; in that way they fluctuate. Now, the young prescriber will sometimes see the patient when he is passing large quantities of uric acid forming the red pepper deposits and he thinks he must stop that; his main idea is to check that one particular thing. But the patient is a great deal better off while he has it. To check it is like suppressing a skin eruption, or restraining any other manifestation of disease.
It will be noticed, as one of the foremost things in this remedy's manifestations, that it has strong smelling urine; the urine is pungent, and it sometimes becomes so strong that it smells like hippuric acid, and so it is said urine smells strong like that of a horse. The odor in this remedy approximates that of hippuric acid.
The complaints, then, of Benzoic acid are such as are changeable, and we know why they are changeable; when the urine is copious and plenty of uric acid is being passed, and the urine is full of deposits, then the patient is at his best; when the urine is scanty or of light specific gravity he suffers from backache and pains in the joints, he suffers from atmospheric changes, is sensitive to cold drafts and to the air; but let the urine start up again, which it does in a sort of alternating way, light urine alternating with heavy urine, and the patient is comfortable again. Then, there are complaints in which the urine smells strong and pungent; this often occurs in children. It is astonishing that these little ones manifest the uric acid diathesis in early life. Mothers often describe it as intensely urinous. It smells like intensified urine; it is not the smell, so much, of decomposed urine nor of foetid urine, but urine intensified. It has cured many times wetting the bed, involuntary urination in sleep, when the bed that has been wetted several times becomes uncleanable. You can smell it almost as quick as you go into the room; the children all smell like urine, strong urine; the house smells like urine. If two or three of these little fellows wet the bed at night, the urine is so strong it tells the story at once.
This medicine needs reproving; details have not been brought out, yet its nature is known. We have a good many medicines having this nature, but this is perhaps as intense as any. This remedy does not, of course, fit all these patients, because it does not fit their special symptoms; but it has the nature or general state which, of course, precedes everything, and when it relates to all the particulars as well it does make wonderful changes.
There are a few mental symptoms. "Inclined to dwell on unpleasant things; if he saw anyone deformed, it made him shudder." Alternation of profound sleep with prolonged periods of wakefulness. In the period of wakefulness, he dwells, during the night, upon all the unpleasant subjects that he can think of. This state alternates with nights of stupid sleep for weeks, and this fluctuates in accordance with the fluctuation of the state of urine. "Sadness." "Anxiety while sweating." "Child cross."
There are many headaches; they are uraemic in character and come in many regions with many details. "Fearful pain in occiput or cerebellum." "Rheumatic pains in head." That is well described, because these headaches of uraemic character take on a similarity to rheumatic pains. "Pain and heat in region of organs of reverence and firmness." "Tearing pain in vertex." The headaches are very numerous; the remedy is full of dull, aching occipital headaches, coming on in the night from change of weather. Pains located in the base of the brain after pains have existed for some time in the joints, and they are passing but little urine. Every time he takes a little cold the urine becomes scanty and he is full of dull aches and pains in the head and especially in the occiput. Perversion of smell. "Sense of smell diminished." "Pain in nasal bones."
Another form of transformation scene takes place in this remedy, when all the gouty symptoms of the body cease and inflammation of the tongue comes on. The pains in the joints cease suddenly from taking cold, from stormy weather and on comes a sudden swelling of the tongue. Mercury also has this state. "Extensive ulcerations of tongue, with deeply chapped or fungoid surfaces." Then, again, peculiar kinds of sore throat take place from this same cause. Sudden stoppage or slacking up of the quantity of urine; it becomes scanty, high coloured, and pungent, smelling like that of a horse (Nitric acid), along with acute inflammation and swelling of the tonsils and throat; inflammation of the tonsils with scanty, strong, pungent urine smelling like that of a horse. Another feature that seems almost like metastasis. Take an individual who is going around with more or less rheumatic aches in the joints; he takes cold and all this ceases, but the next day he comes down with inflammation of the tongue or sore throat, or inflammation of the stomach; so that lie vomits everything he eats. The gout goes to different parts and in this instance it goes to the stomach; and then Benzoic acid, Antimonium crud. or Sanguinaria is likely to be useful. When it goes to the throat or is followed by swelling of the tongue Mercury and Benzoic acid should be thought of. Whenever this gouty condition goes to the stomach, of course it must conform to those symptoms that are in the nature of this remedy. In this remedy we have "loathing, sickness at stomach," "nausea with gagging," "vomiting of a salty substance; bitter."
When we think of Benzoic acid for the stomach symptoms, it is important that we have in mind its whole- nature, how it brings about its complaints and what characterizes a Benzoic acid patient. We would not be able to distinguish from the stomach symptoms alone; we must carry with them the character of the remedy.
It has much disturbance of the liver, and many liver symptoms. As to the bowels, the stool, the rectum, anus and urinary organs, it is very rich in symptoms. Its striking ones I will call your attention to, but remember its migrating, metastatic nature, its complaints going from one part to another, which will accompany these symptoms. "Stools copious, watery." This is true in summer diarrhoea, that has come on suddenly, "excessively offensive." The white stool, like soap-suds, is so strong a symptom that the remedy does not fail to cure even when the gouty constitution is not present. "Excessively offensive, scenting the whole house." "Putrid, bloody." "Watery, light-coloured, very offensive stools (in children)." So we get the idea that the stools are white and that the first passages are like soap-suds, but later the soapy appearance subsides and leaves a white stool. It is well, often, when a stool is passed that is of a light liquid, to bear in mind a few remedies that produce this state and ascertain whether it is like soapsuds or filled with bubbles of air. "Diarrhoea of children." The urinous odor of the body, and especially that peculiarly pungent, intense smell of the urine. "Slightly elevated, wart-like, round surfaces around anus."
The urinary symptoms are too numerous to read. "Foetid urine." "Urine of a very repulsive odor." "Effervescing with hydrochloric acid." The odor is sometimes like hartshorn; it is pungent; these are only efforts to describe the strong smell. "Urine dark brown." It is true that normal urine after standing a while will get a foetid odor, but, in this remedy, that just passed is properly described as being intensely urinous. "Urine contains mucus and pus." "Morbid condition of urine." "Renders urine acid," It says in the text "hippuric acid," but this is a rare condition. "Brown urine smells sour." "Too frequent desire to evacuate bladder." "Nephritic colic." "Urine dark, urinous odor highly intensified." Gouty troubles of the liver; rheumatism; nephritic colic; it has cured such states after gonorrhoea, but it is not much of a gonorrhoeal remedy. When the rheumatic states and these symptoms are present there are more or less pains in the kidney. "Sore pain in the back; burning in the kidney." "Prolapsus uteri with foetid urine." "Retention of urine in infants."
"Asthma with inflammatory rheumatic complaints." "Cough followed by expectoration of green mucus."
The organ that is most commonly affected in these rheumatic complaints is the heart. No organ is so likely to be affected when rheumatism leaves the outermost parts as the heart. Pains in the heart. So in this diathesis, with the strong smelling urine and the gout, we may expect affections of the heart. "Pains change place incessantly." "Palpitation of the heart." The rheumatism, of course, is affecting the heart. "Awakens after midnight with violent pulsations of the heart." Think a moment and you will see in what kind of a case you will need Benzoic acid. The constitution of the remedy comes to mind at once with the heart symptoms, the dyspnoea, pain in the heart with rheumatic symptoms; "cannot go to sleep." Think of the alternation of sleeplessness with sleep; think of the strong urine, of the fluctuating complaints, of the erratic constitution. "Palpitation worse at night." "Rheumatic pains in extremities relieving heart." There we get relief; complaints going back to the extremities with relief to the heart. The heart will relieve when the urine becomes copious or when the rheumatism goes back to the extremities, into the fingers and knees, especially the knees in Benzoic acid. Rheumatism alternating between the extremities and heart. This medicine has cured affections of the heart when the rheumatism has a long time ago disappeared from the extremities and has ever since been affecting the heart; after Benzoic acid has been administered a very good sign of its action is that the extremities become painful and the urine becomes copious; free urine and solids increased; the urine becomes heavy, whereas it was light. "Hard, frequent pulse."
The extremities are full of rheumatic affections. "Lassitude in lower limbs." "Swelling of knee." All gouty affections belong to this remedy. "Gouty concretions." "Nodes on joints." Benzoic acid is often an excellent palliating remedy in old gouty constitutions; they want to be relieved of the pains in their fingers and in the nodes and joints. The fingers crack and are clumsy and painful. But often the pain has been relieved and gone to other parts. This is one among the remedies that will drive the complaints away from the internal organs and generally increase the pain in the extremities, which they will scold about. "Trembling with palpitation of heart." "Extreme weakness; sweat and comatose condition." Note that comatose condition with sweat; the Benzoic acid patient sweats without relief. Copious, exhaustive sweat and profound sleep, but there is no relief. "Awaken with difficulty of breathing." Pulsation all over.
"All sorts of catarrhal states; gouty diathesis, gout with arthritic nodosites, syphilitic rheumatism, etc. These patients are getting low down in the scale of life, the tissues become feeble. Ulcers form upon the skin and mucous membranes.
BERBERIS
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
When we have finished the study of Berberis we will see that it is not a very extensive remedy, but it is a very important one. Like Benzoic acid, it fits into the gouty and rheumatic sphere. It corresponds to such gouty conditions as do not determine to their proper places. A low state of the economy is present; anaemic condition; feeble constitution; pallid and sickly, old and worn out; prematurely old and wrinkled men and women. They are too feeble to determine the gouty deposits to the finger joints, where they naturally belong, and the trouble is yet, as it were, wandering around through the economy. Wandering pains in the nerves, and nerve sheaths. The wandering, stitching, tearing, twinging pains that run through Berberis are found in old gouty constitutions, and that is where we get the greatest benefit from Berberis. Its proving would lead us to see it is similar to the wandering, twinging and tearing pains of old gouty constitutions, in persons who are pallid, and sickly, and chilly, where the deposits have not been so marked in the joints; but where the twinging in the fingers and in the, toes are just such as are found where the deposits do exist. Of course in all of the gouty states we must look to the liver and kidneys for pains and various distresses; they are centers of observation, because these organs are more or less disturbed. And very often cardiac troubles go along with them. The kidneys, liver, and heart are more or less disturbed in their functions and we see that Berberis takes hold of these organs. We have the uraemic state, and the state of disorder that ends in these conditions. We will have twinging pains along with kidney disturbances.
Irregularities of the urine. Copious discharges, alternating with scanty discharges. Light urine, and heavy urine, excessive deposits of uric acid and urates. It is changeable, like Benzoic acid. These two remedies run very much together, yet their symptoms are wholly unlike. We find among these sensations that stitching pains are found in almost every region of the body, and they are all the time changing. Wandering and stitching pains; little twinges. As you sit by his side and talk to a gouty patient, "Ow," he will say. What does he mean by it? He has had one of those twitching pains. The next thing he knows it is in his knee; then it is in his toes; then it is in his head, all over him. Finally the gouty deposits become prominent in the fingers, and after the gout has determined itself, then we have sore fingers; but these correspond more particularly to Ledum, Sulphur, Ã†sculus and Lycopodium, where the disease has become marked and has located in the joints. In Berberis these twinging, tearing, stitching, burning pains are everywhere, they never remain in one place, but are always moving, and they are not often affected by motion. Whether he moves, or keeps still, they keep coming. In a few instances we have pains aggravated by motion, but a very few in proportion to the many pains in Berberis. He moves many times, because he cannot keep still. He moves, because he suffers. There are also many pressing pains. But the burning, stinging, tearing, stitching, wandering pains are the main 'feature, the grand feature of Berberis.
If you single them out in places, in a given joint, from that one joint they will radiate in every direction. If it is the knee joint, they will go up, and down, and every way; if it is the finger joint, they will run in every direction. If it is the kidney, they will go down the ureters; if it is the liver, they will go down into the abdomen in every direction. "Radiating from a particular point," is a distinguishing feature, and it puts Berberis almost alone for radiating pains. This is such a strong feature that Berberis has cured renal colic in many instances because of its well-known ability to shoot out in every direction. It cures gall-stone colic when these little twinges go in every direction from that locality. We see these twinging, shooting pains in gouty constitutions are associated with urinary troubles, and with liver troubles, and we begin to lay a foundation for the study of Berberis.
The joints sometimes swell. "Enlargement of the joints." But the swelling is not so common as the pains without swelling. Soreness, lameness in the joints, with these radiating pains. There will be burning, stitching, tearing, and the pains will radiate and appear in one part of the body then in another. "A pain in the heel as if it were ulcerating," and then the pain shoots off in every direction. Numbness. Lameness. As to the heart, the pulse becomes slow. Very often it is slowed down astonishingly.
The mental symptoms are very defective, that is, we do not know the mental symptoms. There are a few. We know this, that the mind is weak, that he is unable to sustain a mental effort, and that he is forgetful. "Defective recollection and weak memory. Terrifying apparitions in twilight." It is not a strange thing for a child in the dark to imagine all sorts of things, because they have heard graveyard stories from old people; but with this remedy between the daylight and darkness he sees ghosts, imaginary forms coming round him. It has melancholy, apathy, prostration of mind. Some dizziness. The headaches are of the same character as the general pains in uraemic subjects, where there is plenty of sand in the urine, red pepper deposit. The head comes in for its share of these wandering pains. Stitching, tearing, twinging in the scalp; in the skull; in the eyes, ears, back of the head. Burning pains. "A feeling in the head as if it was becoming larger," is a peculiar symptom; a puffy sensation. Always putting the hand to the head; it feels as if he had on a skull-cap. It fits down over the brow, and it is not an uncommon thing with such patients to put the hand to the head to take off the cap. "Feels as if he had a cap on the head," when there is none there. This symptom is not always described like a cap on the head. It is convertible into numbness of the scalp; many patients describe a sensation of numbness in the scalp, as if they had on a cap. Sometimes patients will deny that it is a sensation of numbness, and say it is just a cap. At one time I fully believed the "cap" belonged to two sensations. If it was painful I placed it under "pressure." If it was not painful it was supposed to belong to "numbness;" but I have now made a new rubric, "the sensation of skull-cap," which I now think is entirely distinctive from numbness; but they both have to be compared.
Then the eyes take on that same gouty condition, with stitching, tearing pains, twinging pains, shooting pains. Shooting off in various directions. There is one grand feature about Berberis, that it has no particular direction; it has all directions. Most remedies have pains taking a direction from one part to the other, pains going from the eye to the temple, etc., but in Berberis it cannot be said the pains go to any place in particular. They are wandering pains and they radiate. Pains in the ears of the same character. In every part of the body we have these twinging, tearing, burning, shooting pains coming and going, causing the patient to scowl and make a sharp noise.
The patient has a sickly look; face pale, earthy complexion, with sunken cheeks and hollow, blue-encircled eyes. That is a description of a sick face. Berberis has been very useful in phthisical conditions; and in the pains, and twinging, and sufferings in persons who have been operated on for fistula in ano. When the fistula has been closed, these pains will come if it is a Berberis case. The kidney manifestations will come on, or the liver manifestations, or the enfeebled heart, or these wandering pains. At one time feverish, full of pains, with violent thirst; alternating with the very opposite state. Prostration and aversion to water. Want of appetite at one time; canine hunger at another. The stomach is disordered, digestion is slow and feeble, and we have manifestations usually known to patients as "bilious." Eructations that are bitter and of bile.
The liver is full of suffering. In the liver we have these pains, and added to them sudden stabbing like a knife puncturing the liver. Shooting, tearing, burning, stitching, twinging pains, wandering from one place to another. "Gall-stone colic." These pains with jaundice. The liver seems to slow down in its actions, and the patient becomes jaundiced. The stool becomes white, bileless. "Sharp, pinching pains in the liver, which come suddenly and with great severity. Violent stabbing pain in the region of the liver, taking his breath away. Had to bend double." These pains last a moment and pass away. In gallstone colic pains are spasmodic, increase in intensity and diminish, but do not let up entirely. Berberis when it is indicated will let the little gall-stone loose, and it will pass through, and the patient will take a long breath and wish he had sent for the doctor sooner. Anything that is spasmodic can be relieved instantly.
Pains through the abdomen. Copious, thick, mushy stools, and these are yellow, like yellow corn meal mush. "Diarrhoea; mush-like yellowish discharges." "Clay-coloured." From what we have seen it is not surprising that it is clay-coloured, that it is bileless, that it is white. The action on the liver does that. When you have these symptoms associated with radiating pains, and with wandering pains in broken down constitutions, persons who are suffering from cold, who are pallid and sickly, you have a Berberis case.
Then the patient becomes constipated, but the stool is white, or very light coloured. "Burning, stinging pain before, during, and after stool." Enlargement of the prostate gland, which causes a constant pressure in the perineum. Pressure as if there were a lump, or as if something was pressing down." "Tearing extending around the anus. Herpes around anus. Fistula in ano." Now the surgeons nearly all advocate that if there is a fistulous opening around the anus it must be operated upon. Homoeopathy cures such cases. I have not operated on one for twenty years. The remedy that is indicated for the patient will cure the patient, and the fistula. Above all things, they should not be operated on. To close up that fistulous opening, and thus neglect the patient, is a very dangerous thing to do. Knowing all that I know, if such a trouble should come upon me and I could not find the remedy to cure it I would bear with it patiently, knowing I was keeping a much less grievance. Nor could I advise my patient to have a thing done that I would not have done upon myself. It is a dangerous thing to operate upon a fistula in ano. It is a very serious matter. If it is closed up, and that patient is leaning towards phthisis, he will develop phthisis; if he has a tendency towards Bright's disease, that will hasten it; if he threatens to break down in any direction, his weakest parts will be affected, and he will break down. Occasionally time enough elapses so that the physician who is ignorant does not see the relation between the two. But now that you have heard it, you can never forget it.
And then the kidneys and the urinary organs come in for their troubles. There is such a soreness in the lumbar region, in the region of the kidneys, that he can bear no pressure. He cannot step down from a carriage to the pavement without letting himself down very carefully. A jar is a great shock to him, and sometimes the soreness is so great that he almost faints. Soreness in the back; in the muscles of the back, and in the region of the kidneys; and this associated with all sorts of disturbances in the urine, with excessive deposits. The kidneys radiate in every direction. Pains run up into the kidney, and they become worn out if he does not get relief, he will have some serious disease. Hence we have these symptoms. "Burning and soreness in the region of the kidneys. Burning stitches, single or several in succession, in region of loins and kidneys. Much pain, soreness and tenderness in back, in the region of the kidneys. Sensitiveness in the region of the kidneys so great that any jarring motion, riding in a wagon, jumping from it, was intolerable. After kidney complaints, a foul, bitter taste, rush of blood to the throat. Great urging, with pain in the neck of the bladder, with burning, scanty urine. Violent, cutting, tensive pain, deeply seated in left side of bladder, at last becoming a sticking, obliquely in female urethra, as if in its orifice, lasting a few minutes." Now we see how these symptoms manifest themselves. Sore, inflamed, sensitive kidney, one or both. And then, the formation of little calculi in the pelvis of the kidney, little stones like pinheads; and every now and then one of them takes a start down the ureter to the bladder, and, oh, how he suffers. Then it is that the pains in the kidneys radiate in every direction. Pains run up into the kidney, and down into the bladder. In the male they appear as if they ran down the spermatic cord into the testes, and he is a great sufferer. You will be astonished to know how quickly Berberis will relieve this particular kind of renal colic. Burning pain in the bladder; burning pain in the kidney. "Urine dark, turbid with copious sediment. Urine very slow to flow. Constant urging." The bladder becomes very irritable. Catarrhal conditions of the bladder. Smarting, burning, stitching pains. Many troubles, pains and aches in the spermatic cord and testes in gouty constitutions. Burning pains along these regions.
Berberis especially fits a woman who is tired, with a gouty constitution; though not old in years she is physically tired, so that all of her domestic affairs fret and tire her. Coition becomes painful, and she has an aversion to it. The orgasm is delayed, or is entirely absent, and she is prostrated by it. In all the affairs of her innermost life she is a drudge. Full of twinging pains in all of her nerves. "Burning in female urethra. Burning pain in the vagina." A lack of sensation normal to these parts in the woman.
BORAX
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Borax is one of those domestic remedies that has been long used for local conditions as a soothing substance and for a healing purpose. In "nursing sore mouth" of mother or child Borax has been used in the families of old, in the form of Borax and honey, as a wash. The extensive use that has been made of it would make the homoeopath wonder if the people had not hit upon something, and it is a fact that Borax will rapidly heal up a sore mouth. It is not strange that it does so, for Borax, in its proving, produces aphthous conditions of the mouth, which extend to the throat and even into the stomach. It cures where the genitalia and anus are covered with these aphthous appearances.
Anxiety, fidgetiness, and sensitiveness are prominent in Borax. He is anxious about trifles. He starts at every noise, on hearing unexpected news, from music, from excitement. This anxiety or nervousness, this indescribable feeling that is within him, is aggravated from upward or downward motion. Such a motion as going up in one of our elevators nearly drives him to distraction, but he is made worse going down. All complaints are aggravated from downward motion. It has been said in routine practice, that in all cases of sore mouth in children, when the child is worse from downward motion, Borax is the remedy. When the mother is in the act of laying the child down on the bed it often rouses up in its sleep and cries out in fright. The anxiety may be better appreciated if you will go to the top of one of these high buildings and go down in the elevator. It is natural for everyone to feel, with the rapid motion, an anxious feeling in the stomach, a sensation of falling; that is natural to the healthy man, but if you exaggerate that intensely you have the Borax condition in which the slightest downward motion, of even riding downhill or walking down stairs, or, in the child, when being carried down stairs in the mother's arms, produces a violent aggravation. All the nerves are in a fret.
We notice that Borax has an intensified activity throughout the body; all of his senses are made more acute. His hearing is intensified, he is oversensitive to his surroundings, over-anxious. He has an excitable spirit throughout. Riding downhill produces vertigo. On nervous excitement, fear and apprehension. This is a strong feature of Borax. It has many such symptoms, but the nervous elements partake of this type. As we go through the remedy many other things will be called out; but this may be said to be the principal feature of the mental state, and it is to a great extent the key to Borax cases. "Anxious feeling during downward motion or rocking." The diarrhoea will be cured when that state is present. Aphthae will be cured when that state is present. The rheumatism, menstrual troubles and numerous other complaints will disappear upon the administration of Borax, when this key is present.
It has hysterical manifestations. "Changes from one work to another." It has a restless, nervous, anxious, excitable state that runs through his body. The child screeches and screams when it is dandled and tossed up and down. The motion of the brain, the upward and downward motion, as in swinging, rocking, etc., makes the patient lose himself, he hardly knows where he is; confusion and vertigo come over him. If one rocks the child, it has an anxious expression of face. "Very anxious on riding rapidly downhill." "Anxiety increased until II P. M." That I have noticed in Borax as a peculiar time of aggravation of the anxiety. I have noticed it in women who had periods of insanity, whose nervous trouble and mental state would keep up until II P. M. You will notice sometimes in insane people that it seems as if they were possessed of the devil; and at once a lucid interval will come and they will talk just as if nothing had happened. So it is in Borax, that a great change may occur at II P. M.; this state of anxiety and nervous excitement may stop at that hour. "Fretful, ill-humored, indolent" state increased until there is a stool and relieved by stool. "He starts on hearing an anxious cry;" on hearing an unexpected noise, on hearing something drop from a chair to the floor, or if a door opens unexpectedly. This is all in keeping with the nature of Borax. If you compare Borax with other Natrums you will find an astonishing likeness in the nervous excitability; Natrum carb. and Natrum mur. Aggravation from noise, oversensitiveness to noise and overexcitement of the nerves run through all the Sodium family. They are wonderfully intense people.
"While engaged in thinking at his work, strong nausea." Borax has many times cured this kind of trouble. I have seen it come up in this way; from any sort of meditation he becomes nauseated and excitable and must leave his work and rest a little while, and then he goes at it again until he becomes sick at the stomach and so must rest again. With the aggravation from mental exertion, from noise, from excitement, from downward motion, we get the mental aspect of Borax.
A further examination of the sensorium shows "Vertigo and fullness in head on descending a mountain or stairs." This is a form of the same anxious feeling. This remedy has a good deal of vertigo, sometimes constant vertigo, which is made so intense on downward motion that he must sit still, and do nothing. It has many congestive headaches, pressive headaches and much heat in the head.
There are many eye symptoms. "Granular lids." "Lashes turn inward towards eye and inflame it. Entropion." Granulation and thickening of the mucous membrane of the lid; contractions and scars and drawing inward. "Lower lids entirely inverted." "Difficult opening of lids."
Like all the salts of Sodium the nose suffers from chronic inflammation of the mucous membrane, a catarrhal state, with copious discharge, and crusts in the nose; stoppage of the nose. The whole Natrum family has these dry crusts in the nose, and copious discharges from the nose. Natrum mur. predominantly produces white discharge, and so does Borax; Natr. sulph. produces yellow discharge, and so does Borax; Nair. sulph. produces yellow discharge from the nose, even yellowish-green. Borax is laid down as producing greenish discharge; its characteristic discharge, which is a general of the remedy, is a white discharge.
The face of the infant is pale, and clay-coloured. "Children have small vesicles around the mouth, and on the forehead." Natr. mur. produces herpetic eruptions around the mouth in all of its febrile states, and when the patient takes cold. Borax is sometimes forgotten, and Natr. incur. is thought of because it is better known. When the Natrum constitution is present, then it becomes a process of individualization to determine which one of the Natrums is indicated.
"Aphthae in mouth and on tongue." "Aphthae on tongue and inside of cheek." This alone is not an indication for Borax, although Borax is one among many medicines when the mouth is so sore that the child lets loose its hold of the nipple or bottle. Many prescribers give Borax on that indication alone; but the constitutional state ought to be hunted up, so that there may be constitutional foundation for the remedy, Sulph. ac. is more frequently indicated. "Red blisters on tongue." "Vomiting after drinking." This leads one to expect that this aphthous state has travelled down the oesophagus into the stomach. There are many stomach symptoms present that are likely to be the result of some such condition. "Buccal mucous membrane highly reddened." The sore mouth, such as mothers have and such as infants have, can be cured with Borax. "After every meal flatulent distension." "Constant vomiting." "Vomiting of sour slime." The Borax patient with stomach aphthae will gag and retch and cough, and that is what is called a "stomach cough." Mothers say, "It is a stomach cough," because the child gags and retches with it. "Stomach cough with pain extending into region of spleen."
Little ones often get summer complaints when they need Borax. All around about the anus you will see the aphthous appearances. Great slimy stools are passed day and night; the child keeps up a pitiful crying; the mouth is aphthous, child is emaciating, and holds its head back. "Stools; frequent, soft, light yellow, slimy." Quantities of fluid like boiled starch are emitted from the anus; Borax has that as well as Argentum nitricum. There are also conditions of the rectum producing thickening of the mucous membrane, with stricture, growing smaller and smaller until finally a long thin stool is passed, no larger than a pencil.
This inflammatory stricture has been cured by Borax. In this over-sensitive child when the catarrhal state is general the urine burns so when it passes that with the first urging (which causes the child to realize it must soon urinate) it screams out; screams with the desire to urinate. That is what it means when it says "Worse before urination." It is not that the state of the urinary organs is worse before urinating, but the child in realizing that it must urinate screeches and screams. "Frequent urination preceded by cries." The urine burns and you may know that the child must soon urinate because it commences to cry. "Orifice of urethra pains as if sore, after urinating." "Desire to urinate without being able to pass a drop."
This remedy has cured gonorrhoea. Wherever there is mucous membrane you may expect to find the aphthous patches. There is another feature like Natr. mur. and Natr. carb.; in both male and female it takes away sexual desire; it benumbs the patient, and hence the mind and sexual organs are in a state of indifference.
Then we come to the most striking feature of Borax in regard to the female sexual organs; in the menstrual flow will be found membrane. Borax cures the most violent forms of membranous dysmenorrhoea, when there are violent labor-like pains before and during the flow and it seems as if the uterus would expel itself from the vagina. The flow starts slightly, but the same violent pains keep on, until the expulsion of the membrane. I have known Borax to cure when the membrane was a cast of the uterus. Such patients are easily startled from downward motion; let that be your guide to Borax in membranous dysmenorrhoea. She dreads downward motion, and motions like swinging and rocking. "During menses; throbbing in-head and rushing in ears." "Pinching and griping in abdomen;" that word does not describe it exactly, for it is like the pain in labor; "pain extending from stomach." Pain like the stabbing of a knife in the groin, and that may occur either before or during menstruation. "Tired; sweat after midnight." But, remember, with such things you must have the mental state, the nervous, excitable state and then Borax will cure this dysmenorrhoea. Another grand feature of Borax I read in the next sentence. "Leucorrhoea like the white of egg." It has albuminous leucorrhoea which feels like a hot fluid, and flows down the legs. "White albuminous or starchy leucorrhoea." "Acrid leucorrhoea appearing for two weeks." "Leucorrhoea white as mucus, without any other ailment." Now from this acrid leucorrhoea, from the menstrual state, this false membrane forming and being thrown off, it is no wonder that women are sterile. All these women are sterile, all who have such symptoms are sterile and Borax has cured sterility when this condition was the cause. You will find routinists prescribe Borax for all women who are sterile, regardless of the state. When a remedy is given for sterility, the state must be looked into which is peculiar to the remedy given such a state as that remedy can produce upon the healthy woman.
Another feature. Many times I have used Borax when the mother could not nurse the child; she talks about always having a little, thick milk. "The milk is too thick and tastes badly." This condition of the milk prevents the mother from nursing her child. This is a constitutional state, and Borax, if given in the beginning of pregnancy, to a Borax patient will so change the milk as well as the rest of the constitution that the mother will be able to nurse the child. I have a number of times, when a mother has brought forth several children that she was unable to nurse, given Borax and it has so affected the case that she could nurse the next child. This remedy also has loathing of the breast in infants, due to the fact that the milk tastes bad and not due to any defect on the part of the child. You might think of prescribing for the infant, but if you examine into the case you will find that the child will not take the milk because it is loathsome. The mother needs a .dose of Borax, which will cure the child of its diarrhoea and loathing of milk. "The infant becomes pale, nearly earth-coloured." "The child throws up its hands when an attempt is made to put it clown." If the mother was a Borax mother, the child very likely is a Borax child; it is not an uncommon thing for the mother and baby to need the same remedy; many times I have medicated the child through the mother's milk if both needed the same remedy. Another peculiar feature is that when the child is nursing, there is pain in the opposite breast. Borax is not necessarily limited to the state of confinement; there is a practical use for Borax among nervous women in all states of life.
Borax has cured pleurisy that very much resembled Bryonia, especially on the right side like Bryonia; stitching or darting pains -from without inward' as if through the upper right lung posteriorly; the stitching pains might make you think of Bryonia.
"Wilted, wrinkled skin." "Skin pale or livid." Emaciated; flabby child becomes emaciated. Children become marasmic along with the aphthous condition; they cannot digest. They vomit or have diarrhoea; aphthous condition that extends the whole length of the intestines; involving all mucous membranes. Oversensitive child, screams from downward motion. The aphthae involve a good many. other symptoms; crying before urination, because the bladder is involved. The aphthous condition and worse from downward motion; the oversensitiveness to noise, easily startled, anxious feeling, etc., are the most striking and characterizing features.
BRYONIA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Every medicine has a sphere of action, a peculiar nature whereby it differs from all other medicines, and hence it becomes suitable to complaints of one class and not suitable to those of another. It is like the nature of human beings, as they differ from each other, and also like the nature of disease, which differ from each other in character. We study a remedy also in regard to its velocity and continuance, its remittance or intermittence. The symptoms of some remedies come on suddenly, with great violence, with great rapidity, stay but a short time in their paroxysm, and go off as if nothing had happened. Others come on slowly, are deep acting and continuous, like the continued fevers. We notice the complaints of Ignatia, how flitting and intermittent and unexpected everything is; we notice in Aconite how complaints come on with violence, and in Belladonna with what suddenness they come on. When we come to the study of Bryonia we find it is a most persistent remedy; its complaints develop slowly, i, e., slowly for acute conditions. Its complaints are continuous, remittent, and only occasionally intermittent. The increase into violence, but the violence is not the first flash as in Aconite or Belladonna, and hence it conforms to a type of disease with continued fever to rheumatisms that come with gradually increasing severity, gradually increasing and involving one joint after another, until all the white fibrous tissues are in a state of inflammation, pain and distress. It has inflammatory conditions anywhere about the body, but particularly of the fibrous tissues, serous membranes, ligaments of joints and aponeuroses. It also affects the coating of nerves with its congestions, and these gradually increase in severity.
From the beginning there are present the characteristic features, and it may be seen that this patient is coming down with a Bryonia sickness. The patient has several days of preparation. He does not feel very well, is languid and tired, does not want to be spoken to, does not want to move, and this gradually increases; pains begin to flit over the body, they move around here and there over the fibers in one place and another, and every time he moves the pains increase, until they end in a steady and continuous pain. The parts become hot and inflamed, and at last he is down with rheumatism. The complaints come on after taking cold, not the first few hours, as in Aconite or Bell., but the day after an exposure he begins to feel uneasy and he sneezes and the nose discharges, there is rawness in the chest, and in a day or so he has a chill and comes down with some inflammatory trouble, pneumonia or pleurisy. Its inflammatory complaints include inflammation of the membranes of the brain, sometimes extending into the cord; the pleural membranes, the peritoneum and the heart covering, these are the most common; it also has inflammation of organs. When these conditions come on there is noticed, very early in the case, even before the pains begin, an aversion to motion, and the patient does not know why, but finally he observes that his symptoms are made worse if he has to move, so that the slightest inclination to move is resisted with a feeling of anger, and when he does move he finds lie is aroused to great suffering, and that all the aches and pains of the body come on. Thus we have the well-known Bryonia aggravation from motion. This runs all through the remedy.
This medicine is suitable in a great many diseases, diseases of a typhoid nature, diseases that take on a symptomatic typhoid, diseases that start out as remittents and run into a continued fever, as in pneumonia, pleurisy, inflammation of the liver, of glands, of the bowels, etc. It may be a gastro-enteritis or peritonitis, or inflammation of the bowels, with the sensitiveness, the aggravation from motion and the desire to keep perfectly still. Inflammation of joints, whether of rheumatic, character or not, whether from cold, exposure or injury. Bryonia is often indicated in injuries of joints where Arnica would be a failure.
There is an extreme state of irritability in Bryonia; every word which compels him to answer a question or to think will aggravate him. The effort to talk will be attended with horror. At the beginning of complaints you go to the bedside of a patient who has been grumbling a few days; something is evidently coming on; the family meet you at the door and say, "The patient is almost unconscious ;" you look at him, the face is puffed and purplish, he seems to be dazed, there appears to be a sort of venous stasis all over the body, but especially about the face; his countenance is almost that of an imbecile, yet he is perfectly capable of talking, although he has an aversion to it and appears to outsiders to ignore everything that is said. This sometimes comes on apparently in a short time; the patient awakens in the morning with a dull, congestive headache and a stupid feeling in the head; dullness of mind so that he cannot work, and this feeling gradually increases; such a state is sometimes the forerunner of a serious illness. We find, when a pneumonia or inflammation of the liver, or some slow insidious inflammation is coming on somewhere in the body, but not yet located, that this state will begin in the morning. This is peculiar about the aggravation of Bryonia its troubles commence many times early in the morning. On waking, with the first move, he realizes that things are not all right, there is a state of stupidity bordering on unconsciousness. Those who have been grumbling for a week or ten days wake up in the morning feeling miserable, some time that night or the next day they have to send for the doctor. If this is watched for a few days, a continued fever is observed. Or at night a chill will come on, with much pain in the chest, rusty expectoration, short, dry cough and other symptoms that will be spoken of under Bryonia later, showing that the trouble is going towards the chest; or the condition may gradually increase as a congestive, dull headache. This will be seen when congestion of the brain is coming on. Bryonia sickness often picks out plethoric subjects, those who are venous in their make up, those who, when suffering with cold, come down with catarrhal congestions. Catarrhal fever may be covered by Bryonia. This sluggish state of the mind then is the state of Bryonia, not an excitable state, as in Coffea, Nux vomica, Ignatia, but sluggish, aggravated from motion, aggravated from being talked to, wants to lie still in bed; very great irritability, which is as extreme as that found in Nux or Chamomilla. It also has acute complaints aggravated from anger, from being aroused, from being disturbed, from controversy. Following the early sluggishness, there is later a state of complete stupefaction in Bryonia, in which he becomes quite unconscious, as in typhoid. He goes from a state of partial unconsciousness to one of complete unconsciousness, as in hydrocephalic children.
In rheumatic complaints, in pneumonia, and in typhoid conditions, when he is aroused from this stage of stupefaction he is confused, sees images, thinks he is away from horse and wants to be taken home. Sometimes he will lie and say nothing but that lie "wants to go home." The delirium is of a low type; it is not the flashing wild excitement of Bell. or Strain.; it is the very opposite; he talks and wanders and does not say much unless he is disturbed. You disturb him and he says, "Go away and let me go home," and if you let him alone he will relapse into a perfectly quiet state and seldom speak. "Irrational talk or prattle of his business, aggravated after 3 P. M." Usually you will find the delirium commencing about 9 P. ar., and keeping up all night like the fever.
The acute mental state you will find manifesting its symptoms on rising in the morning, but as the febrile state advances and takes possession of him the symptoms will take on a 9 P. M. aggravation; those who have chill will have it at 9 P. M.; in those who have a fever, the fever will come at 9 P. M. If mental symptoms are uppermost they increase and spread over the night. It has a 3 P. M.. aggravation. Bell. will begin at 3 and run on towards midnight, but Bryonia will begin at 9 P. m. and run on through the night. The aggravation of the Chamomilla patients, who are also extremely irritable, is at 9 A. M. Sometimes we go to the bedside and can hardly distinguish between Bryonia and Cham. because they are both so spunky, but the Cham. baby is worse at 9 A. M. and the Bryonia baby is worse at 9 P. M.
In Bryonia there is a key-note which really applies to a dozen or more remedies, "he wants something and he knows not what." It is a very important symptom of Bryonia. It is a symptom that calls for Bryonia only when the rest of the symptoms agree. You go to a child who is being carried in the arms of the nurse and wants one toy after another; you get the toy he wants and he does not want it and will throw it back at you. When that case is looked into thoroughly it may be covered by Kreosote; another is never satisfied with anything and rejects everything he asks for; you look into that case and it may be covered by Chamomilla.
"Desire for things that cannot be had which are refused, or not wanted when offered." "Apprehensiveness; fearfulness." "Anxiety in whole body compelled him to do something constantly." There is a feature worthy of consideration because it sometimes makes a case appear inconsistent. It is due to his anxiety that pervades the whole body. In Bryonia as in Arsenic there conies on anxious and uneasy feeling which compels him to move, but he is worse from motion, yet so uneasy and anxious that he must move. There are pains so violent that he cannot keep still, and yet when he moves he screeches from the pain. So it is really not an inconsistency but simply due to the great violence of the pain. Even though he knows that the motion is going to make him worse, he cannot keep still; for the pain is so violent. Early in the, case he was able to keep still, and found that he was better from keeping still, and that the mental state was better from keeping still, and that the anxious restlessness increased the more he moved, until finally a reaction comes and lie is obliged to move. You would think, looking at the case superficially, that that patient is better from motion as in Rhus tox., but in Rims you find that the patient moves and in moving he gets feeble, and when he sits down the pains begin to come on again. There is the distinction between the two, and yet they look alike if not examined into carefully. It is common for Bryonia to be ameliorated from cool air, and from cool applications. Now, if he moves, he gets warmed up, the pains are worse, but there are rheumatic complaints of Bryonia which are better from heat, and under these circumstances he is better from continued motion. It is another form of relief, and another of the modalities. I sometimes wonder whether Bryonia has a greater element of relief from heat, or greater element of relief from cold. Most of the head complaints that are of a congestive character are better from cool applications, from cold air, etc. Yet there are some of the Bryonia head complaints that are relieved by hot applications, and these seem to have no accompanying cerebral congestion. So that Bryonia has opposite modalities, but in all its opposite states there is still a grand nature running all through, sufficient to detect it.
In a clamp climate Bryonia is one of the most frequently indicated remedies, but in the clear climates, where the thermometer runs low, Aconite will be indicated more than Bryonia. Still further South, the complaints assume more of the constitutional state of Gelsemium in inflammatory conditions. We know in the far North the sudden, violent cold brings on violent colds like Aconite, while here the complaints are more insidious, like Bryonia, and further South. These atmospheric changes should be thoroughly considered in relation to our Materia Medica.
The mental state of Bryonia is usually relieved from cool air, he wants the windows open. Anxiety, confusion of mind, fear, etc., are ameliorated from being cool. Sometimes the delirium, and the congestive fullness of the head affecting the mind, will increase if the room becomes very warm, or from the heat of the stove, from becoming heated, or from warm covers. In children this will be noticed, whereas if the window be thrown up to relieve the stuffiness of the room the child will sleep quietly. Such remedies as Bryonia, Apis, Pulsatilla, and many others, come in here. If you go into a room and find the child raging with delirium, turning and tossing, and the mother is trying to keep the room warm because she is chilly, and you say, "Why, how stuffy it is in here!" and you open the window and then notice that the child goes off to sleep, do not overlook that; because that relief was caused by something. There should be nothing that can possibly occur to a patient, but that you should solve the meaning of before you leave the room. Settle in your mind as to what it was that caused it.
"Fear of death." Full of fear, anxiety, despair of recovery, great despondency. Both mental and bodily quietness is required, that is, he wants to keep still. Often he wants the room dark. It has complaints from getting excited. Bryonia patients are nearly always worse from visitors. "Morose." Do not cross a Bryonia patient for it makes him worse. "Bad effects from mortifications." "Ailments arising from chagrin;" these are headaches usually. Violent, congestive headaches that come on a few hours after altercation or controversy, or little misunderstandings with somebody that he cannot talk back to, will be covered by Staph., but Bryonia also has that. Staph. is suited to irritable, violent, nervous, excitable people, that get into violent altercation or dispute. If a headache conies on, such a patient may need Bryonia. If in a chronic state a patient says, "Doctor, if I ever have a dispute with a man over anything I come down with nervous excitement, sleeplessness, headaches;" you do not have to work long upon that case, because more than likely Staph. will be suitable.
Bryonia has dizziness; the dizziness is worse in a warm room. You will notice, as I go through, that in everything of a nervous nature, nervous excitement, and commonly the bodily state, the patient is worse from a warm room, worse from too much clothing, worse from the warmth of the bed, wants the windows open, wants to breathe fresh, cool air. He suffers more than ordinary persons, from a stuffy room. Persons who are subject to Bryonia conditions suffer in church, at the opera, in close warm rooms, like Lycopodium. Girls that faint every time they go to church are relieved by Ignatia.
We commence now with the study of the head. The head complaints may be looked upon as striking features of the remedy, because there is pain in the head with almost every acute complaint. Headaches are associated with inflammatory and congestive complaints. The mental dullness and confusion of the mind is spoken of with the congestive headache, and bursting headache. The head feels so full she wants to press it with the hand, or tie it up; tight pressure, over the whole skull, is grateful. The headaches are worse in a warm room and commonly worse from heat. Sometimes superficial neuralgias have relief from local heat, but a warm room or a close room is very distressing to the Bryonia headache. Headaches as if the skull would split open; the pains are worse from every motion, even the winking motion of the eyes, the motion necessary to talking, and the effort of thinking, so that all exertion of body or mind becomes impossible with a severe headache. Must keep perfectly quiet. Sometimes lying down and keeping perfectly quiet in a dark room will give some relief. Light aggravates; if you think a moment you will see that the accommodation to light and shadow of a room involves motion; it is said that the light aggravates, but even here it is the motion that is carried on by the muscles of accommodation. The headaches of Bryonia are very commonly the forerunner of other complaints, congestion of the lungs, bronchitis, or congestion of some other part of the body; he wakes up in the morning with headache; if it be coryza that is coming, he has the headache in the morning and through the day he commences to sneeze; or if the trouble is in some other part of the body, before the symptoms develop, he wakes up in the morning with this congestive headache over the eyes or in the back of the head, or both; it seems as if the head would burst; better from pressure, worse from the warmth of the room, and worse from every motion. Headache over the eyes, sometimes like the stabbing of a knife, worse from the first motion. He realizes it on waking, upon moving the eyes, with soreness in the eyeballs, with bruised feelings all over. The motion of the arms, doing work with the arms, as in various kinds of business that are carried on with the use of the arms and hands, is generally accompanied by complaints of the upper part of the body and especially the head, so that one of the old keynotes in the time of Hering was "complaints from ironing." You blow that ironing is commonly carried on in a warm room, it involves the mofion of the arms, and thus brings in two most striking features of Bryonia, so that this key-note is no longer an abstract statement; it is not to be considered apart from the general nature, but only serves to bring it out. Splitting, violent congestive headaches; headaches as if everything would burst out of the forehead. Pressive pain in the forehead, fullness and heaviness in the forehead as if the brain was pressed out. This fullness or congestion of the head is accompanied by what was described as sluggishness of the mind, and it will often be noticed that the countenance is somewhat besotted. The patient looks as if he were an imbecile. The face is mottled, and purple, with congestion in h marked Bryonia state. The eyes are red and congested; he is listless, does not want to move, to speak, or to do anything, because all these things are motion are efforts, and they make him worse. You will see this is also true in Bell.; it has all of this congestion and pressure; but remember Bryonia is slow, sluggish, passive and insidious in its approach and progress, while in Bell. the mental symptoms and everything in connection are marked by activity. With the headaches there is more or less burning, and sometimes throbbing. The throbbing is seldom felt until lie moves. After any movement, like going up stairs, walking, or turning over in bed during the headache, he feels the violent throbbing; on keeping still a moment it settles down into a bursting, pressing pain as if the skull would be pressed open. There are many other pains in connection with the Bryonia headache; in the text it is described "tearing and stitching pains." "Shooting pains," sharp pains. Some of the pressing pains are described as if a great weight were on the head, but the same idea prevails; it is an internal pressure; a sluggishness of the circulation in the brain, a stasis as if all the blood in the body were surging in the head. "Stitches in the head." "Splitting headache." "Rush of blood to head." Threatened apoplexy. "Headache after washing himself with cold water when face was sweating." That is, taking cold from suppression of perspiration. "Always on coughing, motion in head like pressure." The headache is so bad in many cases of pneumonia or bronchitis, in fact, in any of the inflammatory or congestive conditions, that very often you will see the patient grasp the head when he knows he is going to cough. He holds his head because it hurts so from the action of coughing. Many remedies have this, but it is in keeping with the general aggravation o f Bryonia from motion, from jar, from any effort. "The headache is expanding, aggravated by the slightest motion; after eating." The aggravation after eating is in keeping with the Bryonia state in general. The patient himself, in all complaints, feels worse after eating. It hardly matters what the trouble is, it is worse after eating; the cough is worse after eating, the gouty state is increased by eating. The Bryonia patient will finally sum up the whole subject and say, "I am always worse after eating;" so that it becomes a general. The headaches are often accompanied by nose-bleed. "Obstinate headache with constipation." Bryonia is particularly suitable in venous, sluggish constitutions, with sluggish heart, poor circulation, yet apparently plethoric, apparently rugged; but subject to gouty exacerbations from change of weather.
Dandruff is common; sensitiveness and great soreness of the scalp; worse from the slightest touch of the scalp, feels as if the hair were pulled; women must always have the hair hanging down. In the Bryonia headaches, as well as rheumatic attacks, if he can perspire freely, he will get relief. Bryonia is ameliorated in all its complaints as soon as the perspiration becomes free and general.
Catarrhal conditions of the eyes are found in Bryonia; it is not so often thought of as an inflammatory remedy for the eyes when there are no other symptoms, but eye symptoms will be found, redness, inflammation, congestion, heat, enlargement of the veins, burning and smarting, associated with headaches, with coryza, with troubles in the air passages, bronchitis, etc. Sore aching in the eyes, the eyeballs can hardly be touched, so tender to touch, as if bruised, increased from coughing or pressure. Such conditions come with chest complaints, with colds and headaches. "Soreness and aching of eyes when moving them." "Pressing, crushing pains in eyes." "Inflammation in eyes and lips, especially in new-born infants." Think of Bryonia when gouty conditions have left certain parts and all at once the eyes are affected, tumefaction of the lids, the conjunctiva looks like raw beef, so highly inflamed is it, red and, oozing blood. You find out that a few days before the patient, an old gouty subject, had rheumatic attacks of the joint, and now lie has sore and inflamed eyes. "Rheumatic iritis, caused by cold." Rheumatic inflammation of the eyes, i. e., in inflammatory conditions and congestion with redness, associated more or less with gouty affections. In olden times it was described as "arthritic sore eyes," which means sore eyes in a gouty constitution.
Many of the complaints of Bryonia commence in the nose; sneezing, coryza, running at the nose, red eyes, lachrymation, aching through the nose, eyes and head the first day; then the trouble goes down into the posterior nares, the throat, the larynx, with hoarseness, and then a bronchitis comes on, and if not checked it goes into pneumonia and pleurisy, so that the trouble has travelled from the beginning of the respiratory tract, the nose, to the lung tissue. This is a field for the complaints of Bryonia. All are worse from motion, all parts are subject to a good deal of burning and congestion; more or less fever, sometimes intense fever; the patient himself worse from the slightest motion and wants to keep still; dullness of mind, pressive, congestive headaches; sore, lame and bruised all o'er, often worse at 9 o'clock in the evening; increased dullness of the mind after sleep or on waking in the morning. The cough comes on with great violence, racking the whole body and increasing the headache, and with copious discharge of mucus from the respiratory tract.
"Frequent sneezing." "Sneezing between coughs." "Loss of smell." Bleeding from the nose in these congestions, or with coryzas. During menstruation there is epistaxis. Congestion of the head is present at the menstrual period. Epistaxis appears as a vicarious flow in cases of menorrhoea. If the menstrual flow should be checked suddenly from cold, nosebleed comes on. Dryness in the nose.
The aspect of the face is important; the besotted, purple, bloated countenance is not dropsically bloated, although it has the oedematous face sometimes, but puffed from vascular stasis, not pitting upon pressure; swollen and puffed, purple, with a doltish state of the mind, as if he were drunk. He will look at you and wonder what you were doing, and what you said; a stupefaction of the intellect; the eyes do not look at you intelligently. When a patient is about to come down with some Bryonia complaint, with a remittent, or with head congestions, or pneumonia, or some other respiratory disease, the family will notice when he awakes in the morning that he has that besotted expression, and he says he has to make such an effort to think or do anything, and his head aches hard, and is worse from motion. Or the face is red and burning, "red spots on the face and neck;" "hot, bloated, red face."
In children, as well as adults, there is gradually increasing cerebral trouble, dilated pupils, besotted countenance, and continual lateral motion of the lower jaw. This motion of the jaw in a congestive attack is a strong feature of Bryonia. It is not the grinding of the teeth so much that I refer to now, although that is found in Bryonia, but a lateral movement of the jaw as if chewing, but the teeth do not come in contact, and they keep it up night and day. A great many remedies have grinding of the teeth. When intermittent fever comes on with marked congestion, stupefaction of the intellect, violent rigors, even to a congestive chill, the patient lying in stupefaction or a semi-conscious state, without grinding the teeth, yet wagging the jaw back and forth by the hour, Bryonia is often suitable. Constant motion of the mouth as if the patient were chewing, in brain affections of children; it occurs in little ones when there are no teeth; but they keep up a chewing motion.
In regard to the lips and lower part of the face, that bloated, swollen condition, the sluggish circulation, a venous congestion or stasis will be found in Bryonia, making the aspect as of one long intoxicated; it is not so marked as in Baptisia and is not accompanied by so low a state, so advanced a stupor, as in Baptisia. Great dryness of the lips ; the lips parched and dry. "Children pick the lips." "Lips cracked and bleeding." Lips parched, dry and bleeding, such as will be seen in typhoid states, where the whole mouth is dry and brown, cracked, parched and bleeding; dry, brown tongue. Sordes on the teeth. In Arunt triph. there is marked picking of the nose and lips; they pick and d pick and bore the finger into the nose.
Bryonia has toothache, worse from warmth. "Tearing, stitching toothache while eating;" from warm drinks, from warm foods, worse in a warm room, wants cold foods in the mouth, wants to be in cold air, but worse from motion. "Toothache > by cold water or lying on painful side." Pressing hard upon the painful tooth ameliorates it. "Toothache < from smoking." You see how the relief from cold and aggravation from heat go along with us; we shall keep refit-crating these modalities that affect the patient as a general state, and we shall see as we go through that nearly all his symptoms are worse from motion, worse from heat, etc. He keeps on telling us they are better from pressure in each region we go over, until finally we come to the conclusion that they are general. We may have in two remedies the same set of symptoms, and yet they are all made worse from the opposite things. Thus you see modalities indicate and contraindicate remedies. This is the studying of remedies by their modalities, for modalities sometimes constitute strong generals.
You will not be surprised to know that Bryonia loses his sense of taste, so that if he has a coryza nothing tastes natural. Not only is there mental sluggishness, but there is a slowing down of his sensations, his whole state is benumbed. "Taste flat, insipid, pasty" His intelligence is so affected that he does not know where he is even, thinks he is away from home, and even his tongue is no longer intelligent; so that something that is sour tastes as though bitter; his senses deceive him. "Tongue thickly coated white." In typhoid, in cerebral congestion, in sore throat, in pneumonia, in all diseases of the respiratory apparatus, in rheumatic affections, the tongue is thickly coated. "Dry and bleeding and covered with crusts." Such a tongue is found in typhoid fever, a dry, brown, cracked, bleeding tongue. When he takes a cold the mouth becomes dry. It is very common for the Bryonia patient to have great thirst; he is apt to drink large quantities of water, at wide intervals. With this dry, brown tongue, however, he loses his taste for water and does not want it; dry mouth and thirstless like Nux moschata. "Aphthx." "Bad odor from mouth."
Bryonia has nondescript sore throats, with stitching pains, with dryness, with parched appearance of the throat, and thirst for large quantities of water at long intervals. "Constitutional tendency to aphthous formations in the throat," little white spots in the throat.
Then we come to the desires and aversions that relate to the stomach, and they are greatly perverted. He is worse from eating. The stomach has lost its ability to digest, and hence he has an aversion to all food. "Desires things immediately and when offered they are refused." He is changeable, does not know what he wants. He craves in the mind the things he has an aversion to in the stomach. When he sees it he does not want it. His intelligence is in a state of confusion. He craves adds. "Great thirst day and night; he wants cold water. "Thirst for large quantities at long intervals" Many remedies want to sip water all the, time. In Bryonia the large quantities relieve the thirst immediately. In Arsenic the drink does not relieve, he wants a little and wants it often.
The stomach complaints of Bryonia are relieved from warm drinks; that becomes a particular because his desire is for cold drinks, but his stomach is better from warm drinks. In his fever and head complaints and febrile states he wants cold things, which often bring on and increase the cough and pains, but the hot drink, which he does not crave, relieves the stomach and bowel complaints. In the chill, Bryonia often has desire for ice-cold water, which chills him dreadfully; and hot water relieves. "Desire for cold and acid drinks." Aversion to rich fat food; all greasy things. "Desire for things which are not to be had."
When patients are under constitutional remedies, they need caution about certain kinds of foods that are known to disagree with their constitutional remedy. A Bryonia patient is often made sick from eating sauer kraut, from vegetable salads, chicken salad, etc., so that you need not be surprised, after administering a dose of Bryonia for a constitutional state, to have your patient come in and say she has been made very ill from eating some one of these things. It is well to caution persons who are under the influence of Puts. to avoid the use of fat foods, because very often they will upset the action of the remedy. It is well to say to patients who are under Lyc., "See that you do not eat oysters while taking this medicine." These medicines are known to produce states in the stomach inimical to certain kinds of foods; certain remedies have violently inimical relation to acids, lemons, etc. If you do not particularly mention the fact, and say, "You must not touch vinegar or lemons, nor take lemon juice while taking this medicine," you will have the remedy spoiled, and then wonder why it is. The medicine often stops acting and the patient gets a disordered condition of the stomach and bowels; a medicine that should act for a long time ceases action and you do not know what the trouble is. Homoeopathy will rule out such things as are inimical to the remedies and inimical to patients in general, or do not agree with a particular constitution. To have an iron-clad rule is not correct practice; the only iron-clad rule is to be sure that the remedy is similar to the patient when you administer it, and the things that he is to have arc to be in agreement with that remedy. It is not an uncommon thing for a patient who has been under the influence of Rhus tox, and has been doing well up to 4 certain time, after he has taken a bath, to have his symptoms return in the form-of a Rhus state; the action of the remedy stops right there. He must of course take a bath, and yet it is true that some constitutional cases under Rhus must stop taking their ordinary bath in order to keep themselves under the influence of Rhus. It is the same with Calcarca a bath will often stop the action. I only speak of these things to impress upon you the importance of feeding and treating your patient in accordance with the remedy; in accordance with a principle and not by rule; do not have one list of foods for your patients; do not have a list of things for everybody. There is no such thing in Homoeopathy.
The patient himself in all the strange and peculiar things is worse from eating; the cough is worse from eating, the complaints of the head, the headaches, are worse from eating, and the respiration is worse from eating. The stomach is distended with wind after eating, but especially after oysters. Oysters are not, as a rule, a dangerous article of diet, yet some are poisoned by oysters. "Worse after eating or drinking." When the case is one of whooping cough, the cough is worse, the paroxysms are more violent and all the symptoms are worse a little while after eating, but later, when digestion is finished and the stomach is empty, he is much relieved. The Bryonia patient is ordinarily relieved from drinking, but if, when overheated, he drinks cold water, all of his rheumatic symptoms are worse, the cough is worse, and the headache is worse. He will have a violent headache after drinking cold water when heated. In Rhus patients complaints are worse from drinking cold water when heated. The headache increases into a throbbing and bursting pain tenfold greater than it was before drinking.
The Bryonia patient is subject to hiccough, to belching, to nausea and vomiting, so that disordered stomach is the general term. Bitter eructations; bitter nauseous taste. He vomits bile. After eating all these things are increased. In the stomach and abdomen we have a great many symptoms resulting from disordered stomach, or from taking cold, or from becoming overheated, or from drinking ice water when overheated. Disordered stomach; irritation of the stomach so that he cannot eat without extreme pain, and this increases until the inflammatory condition involves the whole stomach and abdomen, and there is sensitiveness to pressure, and it can be diagnosed as a gastro-enteritis, with the soreness and tenderness, stitching, burning pains, all worse from motion; nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea, tympanitic abdomen; unable to move because it so ingresses the pain.
With the exception of the abdominal and stomach pains, the Bryonia pains arc better from pressure. The Bryonia patient with these inflammatory conditions will often be seen lying perfectly quiet in bed with the knees drawn up; lying with the limbs flexed in order to relax the abdominal muscles; he does not want to be talked to, does not want to think; every movement is painful, and increases the fever and often causes alternation of chilliness with heat; high fever.
The Bryonia patient, when lying perfectly quiet, is sometimes quite free from nausea, but the instant the head is raised from the pillow the dreadful sickness returns, so that he cannot sit up. He cannot be raised up in bed because of the nausea, and if he persists in rising up the nausea comes on more than ever, with burning in the stomach. With every motion he gulps up a little mucus and slime, which is putrid.
All sorts of pains are left in the stomach and bowels, but most particularly stitching and burning pains; feels as if the stomach would burst, as if the abdomen would burst. Peritoneal exudations. Awful soreness. Sensitiveness of the pit of the stomach, and sensitiveness over the whole abdomen. This is commonly relieved by heat, although the patient himself wants to lie in a cool room. The heat of the room is oppressive, yet heat applied is agreeable. Every inspiration, every motion of the chest greatly aggravates these pains, so that you will find a Bryonia patient shortening up his breathing instead of breathing deep. He keeps that up until he cannot stand it any longer, and then he takes a long breath that causes groaning. Gastric inflammatory affections and disordered stomach, gastric affections in young girls from suppression of the menstrual flow, gastritis, gastroenteritis.
Bryonia has inflammation of the liver and many other liver symptoms. The liver, especially the right lobe, lies in the hypochondrium like a load, with soreness and tenderness to pressure, and he cannot move. Every motion, every touch, every deep breath causes pain in this organ, as in the abdominal viscera. The breathing is short, quick, and when followed by taking a deep breath it causes pain through the liver; it burns and stitches. With this, he has the disordered stomach, nausea and retching worse from motion; spitting up of bile. Stitching pains, sticking pains and burning in the liver. "Transient stitches in right hypochondrium;" these are in the liver. When he coughs it feels as if the liver or right hypochondrium would burst. Severe pains when coughing.
Bryonia furnishes many symptoms in connection with the stool and rectum. It has constipation, and it has dysentery. The pathogenesis is full of these conditions as well as many symptoms relating to the parts themselves. In the constipation the stool is dry and hard, as if burnt. No desire for stool, but after going many days there are passages of little hard pieces as if they had been burned. No moisture about the parts, no mucus to soften the hard stools. Any mucus that may be present will be discharged separately. Sometimes the stool is composed of little hard particles looking as if burned, at times scanty, again quite a lot, and then will follow the passage of mucus, as if lying about the mass of fasces was quite a lot of mucus. In most inveterate constipations Bryonia is sometimes suitable. It has also a diarrhoea that drives the patient out of bed in the morning; i. e., on first beginning to move in bed he begins to feel nauseated, he is bloated and distended with colic, and he has urging to go to stool; or a little while after getting up and moving about the bowel is distended causing colic, and he must hurry to stool. The purgation is sometimes enormous, frequent, and no sooner does the patient finish than he is perfectly exhausted, lies down like one almost dead, covered with sweat; so tremendously fatigued he can hardly reach the vessel the next time, and then it comes a gushing, copious, bilious stool. If, while lying, he makes the least motion, he must hurry to stool. Bryonia cures dysentery with all the tormina and tenesmus possible to imagine, with pain in the abdomen; with bloody and mucous discharges. In the constipation the straining is often ineffectual. He has urging to stool and goes several times before there is any result. The stool seems to remain in the rectum although he seems to be compelled to strain; there is inactivity and inability to strain. Ordinarily he has plenty of power and is quite likely to have a passage, but it is so dry. Bryonia has another kind of diarrhoea. It is like the yellow corn meal mush. Just such a stool as this you will find in the typhoid patient, a yellow, mushy stool. This is sometimes intermingled with mucus and slime, sometimes with blood. It may be useful to the physician to know whether this is in the typhoid state or in the form of chronic diarrhoea. Bryonia has cured many cases of chronic diarrhoea where this yellow, mushy discharge was present, and frequent; several times a day, but more frequent in the morning. Sometimes he has several stools in the morning that will satisfy for the whole twenty-four hours, or only one or two in the afternoon and five or six in the morning; during the night no stools at all, because when he keeps quiet in bed and comfortable he has not very much urging to stool; every motion or keeping upon the feet increases the urging to stool. So that some would think of it as diarrhoea only in the day-time, and would associate it with Petroleum; but with Petroleum, no matter how much he moves about in the night, he will not have a stool, but will have all of the stools in the day-time. It says here: "Diarrhoea putrid; smelling like "old cheese." "Very offensive." "Brown, thin, faecal stools." Sometimes chronic Bryonia patients will diet themselves, eating only thin liquids, avoiding solids, etc., and yet the food will come right through the next morning almost undigested; lienteric stools. "Urging followed by copious pasty evacuations." "Involuntary stools while asleep." "Burning of the anus with every passage." This is especially at night if he moves, but motion is more common in the day-time, and every motion will bring on urging to stool.
There are plenty of urinary symptoms in this remedy; inflammatory condition of the kidneys; pinkish urinary deposits, uric acid crystals; urine profuse. Whenever he strains himself in lifting, or any unusual motion, there is pain in the kidneys, a rousing up of congesting and long-lasting pain. It is a gouty constitution with kidney troubles, so that after overheating or overexertion he gets pain in the back. "Pressure to urinate and involuntary discharge of urine." "Burning in urethra, when not urinating;" relieved by passing urine.
There are many symptoms of the female sexual organs of great interest. Painful menstruation, dysmenorrhoea; pain in the ovaries at the menstrual period. Every menstrual period is associated with marked congestion of the ovaries, with sensitiveness to touch. The sensitiveness at the approach of every menstrual period, in both groins, will be spoken of by the patient, increasing as the menstrual period comes on, until the soreness proceeds across the abdomen and meets, and then the whole abdomen is painful during the menstrual period. The uterus is sore, the hypogastrium is tender. Inflammation of the uterus. Burning pain mostly in the body or fundus of the uterus. The Bryonia patient is subject to amenorrhoea, or the flow is suppressed upon the slightest provocation. If she becomes overheated from exertion, such as from ironing or washing a few days before the menstrual period, it will be suppressed, and the next time, she will have a harder time than ever. In young plethoric women, after violent exertion, these complaints come on in that way. Violent exertion then scanty urine. Soreness of the abdomen, but the flow does not come, or is postponed a good many days after violent exertion; scanty urine and suppression of menses in plethoric girls.
From overexertion- and becoming overheated, threatened abortion. In inflammation of the breasts and stopping of the milk flow in the lying-in period. Bryonia must be consulted. In milk fever and pains and swelling of the breast Bryonia must be studied. During confinement a woman becomes overheated and naturally perspires; just at the close of it as the delivery takes place, if the nurse and the doctor do not observe and throw more clothing over her, or at least keep the room warm enough, there will be sudden suppression of the sweat, and this will bring on milk fever and other febrile symptoms which will need Bryonia. Threatened peritonitis from such causes, gonorrhoeal troubles, old rheumatic troubles, pains or aches, if made worse from the slightest motion. If due to septicaemia rather than to suppression of the sweat, very commonly a deeper acting remedy is required. In inflammatory conditions of the breast one of the most striking things is the stony hardness of the breasts, hardness and heaviness. Bryonia is often suitable for inflammation of the breasts at other times; heaviness and hardness of the breasts prior to menstruation.
Then we come to the respiratory tract again, which we have only hinted at, and here we have a tremendous study before us. Very commonly the Bryonia conditions commence with a cold; it may be at first loss of voice, with rawness in the trachea and great soreness in the chest; dry, hacking cough, as if the chest would burst from coughing. The Bryonia patient sits up and holds the head, or holds the chest; presses both hands upon the chest when coughing, feels as if the chest would fly to pieces when coughing; pains in the chest on both sides, but mostly the right side. Bryonia prefers the right side when the condition is pneumonia. We see a patient who had first a cold, and the cold has travelled down the air passages, with hoarseness and rawness in the chest and cough; the cough shakes the whole body, then comes a hard chill. He is now down in bed, and when the physician sees him he sees the state of inflammation and knows the meaning of it, and listening confirms the diagnosis of pneumonia. The patient cannot move hand or foot; the pain is mostly in the right lung, and he is compelled to lie on the right side or back and dreads motion. Sometimes the pleura are involved and we have the sharp pains; every respiration causes intense pain, whether it is pleuro-pneumonia or a simple pneumonia. But we see the Bryonia patient lying upon the side that is affected, upon the painful side, in order to diminish the motion that respiration causes; and very often he will have a hand under it to see if he cannot hold it still. With Bryonia the expectoration is of a reddish tinge, is rusty, and if you have this symptom and the right side affected it is all the more strongly Bryonia. There are a few medicines that look somewhat like Bryonia; take, for instance, a case with high fever, intense heat, great excitement, and consider the rapidity with which the trouble has come on, involving the left side and in the pan you see the sputum consists of bright red blood, Aconite will be the remedy. If the liver is involved, there is fullness in the side, stitching pain over the liver, and the face is yellow, it is not impossible for Bryonia to be indicated, for it has such things; but with pain very severe, continually going from the front to the back through the right shoulder-blade, Chelidonium is more likely to cure than Bryonia. These comparisons may be carried out indefinitely, but the study of Bryonia as to the respiratory apparatus is a wonderful one. With these colds that end in loss of voice, it has burning and tickling in the larynx, constant cough. Hoarseness and loss of voice in singers. Great soreness in the trachea; rawness and tightness in the trachea, even suffocation, like Phosphorus. The Bryonia breathing is panting and very rapid, little short rapid breaths, due to the fact that deep breathing increases the pain; the Bryonia patient desires to breathe deep, wants deep breathing, needs deep breathing, but it hurts him so. "Constant disposition to sigh," but cannot because it hurts him so. Shortness of breath, suffocation, asthma. Asthmatic attacks from becoming overheated. Asthma worse in a warm room, wants cool air to breathe. "Dry, spasmodic cough, whooping cough, shaking the whole body." Cough compels him to spring up in bed involuntarily; painful cough with difficult breathing, cough that shakes the whole body. Tough, difficult expectoration. "Cough evening and night, dry cough."
A great deal of the rest of Bryonia, as we go over it, is repetition. If you will only read the text carefully and make application of what has been said, you see the general character and idea of the remedy, you see its image and you will fill it out for yourselves, if you have a full text-book.
BUFO
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
The little glands along the back of the toad's neck, when squeezed with forceps, ooze a secretion which is soluble in alcohol and has been proved; this is the subject we will now consider. Bufo satyhienis is the one I use in practice. Bufo is a wonderful medicine; it profoundly affects the mind and especially the intellectual faculties, including confusion of mind and loss of memory until the patient gradually goes towards a state of imbecility. The greatest use of this medicine will be found in nervous conditions, throbbings, jerking and spasmodic condition of muscles, ulceration of the skin and mucous membranes, and all this in such patients as are tending towards a state of imbecility, a state of confusion or weakness of mind. This imbecility is more frequent in Bufo than the active states of insanity or mania, yet these appear occasionally through the remedy.
The first symptom in the text reads, "Desire for solitude in order to practice masturbation." This alone throws a flood of light upon the nature of the remedy; the lack of government, the lack of control over the sexual longing, and the low-mindedness whereby he is willing to abandon himself to the lower things that are in the human race, to perverted practices and vices. It tells a great story. "Whimpered, then cried, until he fell into a state of coma." These states, as brought out clinically, are manifested in adult people who act as if they were children. An aspect of child-like simplicity is present and the mind returns to a state of child-like innocence. An adult takes on the ways of a child, as a state of imbecility. This mental state is especially found under Baryta carb. in adults who have never developed beyond childhood, who have always remained children. A person reasons like a child, talks like a child, whimpers like a child, cries like a child, wants to be petted like a child; so it is in Baryta carb. We find this state of mind in children who have developed epilepsy, but we do not prescribe this remedy on account of the epilepsy; the child has not developed properly, and the epilepsy is only one of the manifestations. The cause is far back, and is really the psoric condition. Thereby the mental state has not developed, the child has not grown into a man or woman in intellectual attainments or wisdom, and remains as a whimpering, screaming child. This lack of development is found in Bufo and in Baryta carb.; they are related to each other in that the child-like state remains while the body grows. We see in these medicines the fear and simplicity that belongs to the child; always sickly, deficient, never reaching adult fullness or growth, always a child. "How much like a child that woman appears," or "How much like a child that man is." We say that of some old people, they are so childish. The old routinists have said of those people who are prematurely old or have taken on senility, that they need Baryta carb. This medicine also stands out in bold type for those prematurely senile; the man at fifty acts like an old broken-down man of eighty; he has lost all he had five or six years ago, and has taken on a child-like simplicity and innocence, an appearance of imbecility. Then it is that we think of this medicine. Baryta carb. has hitherto been the leading one, but Bufo is also very important. "Left his bed after apathy and ran like mad through the house." There it branches off from the condition of imbecility to that of excitement of mind. Most of the Bufo patients will be passive, placid, not in a state of excitement or mania, but passive in everything. Feeble-minded, simple, child-like. "Weak memory and idiotic." "Longs for solitude, yet dreads being alone." "Angry, bites at surrounding objects." "Easily laughs or cries." It has been used in delirium tremens, during the stages of excitement and mental prostration, biting and grasping things. "Titters;" now that is more expressive than to say she laughs, she titters at every little thing that is said. Titters and says foolish things; titters over things that are not laughable; everything said seems to be funny to this simple, child-like woman. You know a child laughs and is merry, but we do not expect such things in adults except when what is said is particularly ludicrous. These symptoms are sometimes met in epileptics. "Easily laughs or cries;" easily affected, an extremely sensitive, nervous nature. Again, the most extreme anxiety, night and day, wringing the hands and talking about something awful that is going to happen when there is nothing to happen; some awful event, some terrible thing in the future, it is all darkness and despair, walks the floor and wrings the hands and says over and over the same awful things that are going to take place, when in reality the future is safe and there is nothing to be anxious about. This occurs in cases of insanity. Such as are approaching imbecility are passive, they have a lack of comprehension of things around; but those that are going into insanity have an increased imagination of the things that surround them. Where these symptoms have been induced by secret vice.
"Become angry if misunderstood." This is approaching insanity. It is well known to medical men and to the courts that these conditions of insanity intermingle in the human race with epilepsy, and that an epileptic is not always held responsible for murder, because it is : so well known that the epileptic state of the body is not confined merely to the spasms of the muscles, the sudden falling, foaming at the mouth, clonic spasms, biting of the tongue, etc. These alone do not constitute all of epilepsy. The epileptic suffers from an underlying psoric state, which in one is a state of imbecility and in another a state of epileptic manifestation, and in another a state of insanity. Those who inherit this peculiar constitution, even in one family, exhibit it in different ways; one will be insane, another one imbecile, another will die of cancer and another will be an epileptic. Bufo underlies such a constitution; it is an antipsoric, it is a deep-seated, vital remedy; it goes to the very heart and interior of man's physical nature, and from this mental state it may manifest itself in his ultimates, the fingers and toes, eyes, ears, etc., so that even the touch is disordered. There are patches upon the skin that have loss of sensation and others with increased sensations. Spasms of various muscles, sometimes local spasm and sometimes complete epileptic spasms with bleeding at the mouth, unconsciousness, falling down.
Besides such grave state, it has milder states that may be called mere dizziness or vertigo. The milder conditions of dizziness have gone on to sudden falling and collapse, a sudden state of unconsciousness with spasms and biting of the tongue. In the proving we find attacks of apathy and partial coma; numbness of the brain. So we see in the text that we have conditions ranging from mere dizziness to a complete and profound epilepsy. The study of this remedy may reveal to you something of the nature of epilepsy. From the allopathic treatises on epilepsy you will only get the appearance of the fit, and the fit is treated as epilepsy. They hunt for remedies to subdue and control the fit, thinking when they have done that they have cured the patient. They feed these patients Bromides in large doses and now and then they branch off into some side issue, but go back to the Bromides and stupefy and make imbeciles of their patients. Prescribing for the fit has never cured the patient.
"Congestive headaches." Again, its action on the circular fibers of the abdominal aorta furnishes a key-note in epilepsy. An awful sensation of anxiety is felt in the abdomen and then there is a sudden loss of consciousness; the aura or warning is first felt in the abdomen. Some writers have described it as in the solar plexus. The awful sensation occurs as an anxiety and then he falls.
"Cannot bear the sight of brilliant objects." "Amaurosis," etc. "Pupils largely dilated and unaffected by light before attack." "More acute vision."
It has spasmodic conditions of the eye, but increased vision and diminished sensation, and lastly a tendency to profound trophic disturbance. Little blisters form upon the eye. These little blisters also form upon the skin, and the integument is thrown off and there is no healing. Ulcers will form upon the cornea. "Eyes become highly injected." Paralytic conditions of the lids and muscles of the eye. There is disturbance of all the senses. "Music is unbearable." One who is in a natural state is expected to enjoy beautiful music, whereas in this remedy music brings about a state of anxiety. The sense of hearing is so violently exaggerated that every little noise is distressing. "Purulent otorrhoea." "Swelling of the ears, of the parotids." "Phlegmonous erysipelas about the face." "Falling out of the teeth" in the peculiar disease known as Rigg's disease.
"Stuttering and stammering; gets angry when incoherent speech is not understood." "Biting the tongue." "Tongue cracked, bluish-black." "Mouth wide open before an attack," showing that the spasm is coming on; and this condition increases so that when the attack is not on, he drops the jaw and looks stupid as if he had forgotten everything. Bufo often corresponds to lesser attacks resembling vertigo. In this state people do not fall, and for a few seconds everything is a blank, or sometimes they do things automatically in these moments. A person, in this mild form of epileptic vertigo, will hardly show anything, but he will sometimes come to a perfect standstill and then go on as if nothing had happened. What occurred during that attack he knows nothing of. Sometimes he will continue right on doing what he was doing, and nobody will know of the spell. Sometimes when driving he will turn his horses around, and when he comes to himself he will know by this that he has had one of his attacks. Quite a number of medicines have produced that condition of the mind, a state in which he goes on doing things automatically.
"Vomiting after drinking." "Yellow fluid in vomit." "Vomiting of bile or blood." "Spasms end by convulsive movements in abdomen." It says in the text, "The attack originates in abdomen;" that is, he has a feeling of anxiety in the abdomen previous to the attack.
"Haemorrhoidal tumors." "Urine passes involuntarily." The urine passes involuntarily in such as are becoming imbeciles from the epileptic attacks, in approaching softening of the brain, which is really what is taking place, a form of softening, a lowered form of integrity.
As you might suppose, there is great disturbance of the sexual organs; this is usually the case in insane people. Sometimes the sexual organs are in a state of excitement and sometimes in a state of impotency; but the patient is low-minded; inclination to carry the hand constantly to the genital organs. "Semen is discharged too quickly without pleasurable sensation." Spasms or epilepsy comes on during coition. It has also inflammation of glands, especially about the groins, such as are found in syphilis.
In the female sexual organs burning is the most striking feature; burning in the ovaries and uterus. It is one of the most troublesome symptoms you will have to contend with, when a case of dysmenorrhoea has burning in the ovaries and in the pelvis, at the coming on of or during menses. Burning in the genital organs, in the ovaries, and rending, tearing pains that extend down the thighs. This forms a troublesome kind of dysmenorrhoea, especially when there are cysts and hydatids about the ovaries. Some will tell you that these cannot be cured. All these conditions are curable! Burning heat and stitches in ovaries." "Distending, burning pains or cramps in uterus." This remedy has been a great palliative for these awful burning pains that occur in carcinoma of the uterus; stitching, rending, tearing pains in carcinoma of the uterus, when the pains run outwards into the legs, with ulceration of the uterus and cervix; tearing, stinging pains and bloody, offensive leucorrhoea. Bufo is full of offensive discharges; bloody, offensive leucorrhoea. You would think you had the odor of gangrene or gangrenous erysipelas in the room from smelling these discharges. "Enormous blisters upon tumefied uterus, discharging a thin, serous, yellow fluid." This occurs in epileptic states.
"Menstruation suppressed," "too early with headache," "burning in uterus and vagina." "Spasms occur just before menses." That is, girls who are subject to epilepsy have increase of spasm at the time of menses, sometimes before, sometimes during. "Attacks worse at time of menses." "During menses contractive pain in liver." "Yellow fluid leucorrhoea." When the girl lies in an unconscious condition during the menstrual period and has several epileptic spasms which she has no realization of until told and then she is too much dazed to understand it she needs Bufo.
Bufo has been a great palliative in cancer of the mammal, for the burning pains and for the blisters that form roundabout; large, yellow blisters; blisters that fill with yellow, serous discharge; it has been especially useful when the milk is mixed with blood. It corresponds to the low form of inflammation of the blood vessels, like milk leg, when the veins feel like whipcords in the thighs.
"Burning, excoriation in larynx." You see how burning runs all through the remedy; it occurs wherever there are inflammatory conditions or where nerves are sensitive and painful, and the nerve sheath becomes painful and sensitive to touch along its course; hence its use in sciatica and other inflammatory conditions of large nerves.
"Violent cough with vomiting." Cough with gagging and retching. Expectoration is bloody or formed of pure blood. Sensation of coldness in chest. "Burning like fire in lungs." Burning extending up into the larynx; gangrene of the lungs. "Laryngitis, haemoptysis." Burning in the chest with all these affections, such as have been described. It has the phthisical constitution when the epilepsy has been turned aside by strong drugs. It has the phthisical constitution when discharges have been suppressed by closing fistulous openings, or by stimulating ointments. It has those low forms of disease which must develop when outward manifestations have been suppressed. The constitution that belongs to the very nature of the individual will come out in epilepsy, in insanity, in imbecility, in cancer, in some one of the low forms of disease. This medicine corresponds to a low type and constitution. The nature of the Bufo constitution is such that it is capable of giving out symptoms similar to those produced by low forms of disease. He is not likely to live to be old, he is likely to break down at forty. She comes to her end by cancer of uterus or breast, or by imbecility. He comes to his end with low forms of disease, malignant manifestations. This medicine, therefore, goes into the very life. Children develop an unusual tendency to low forms of chronic disease; they do not possess a good healthy nature, a good sound brain; but they are feeble, they break out with eruptions, they go into consumption. Persons of twenty-five have a tendency to break down, and when the symptoms look like those of Bufo this medicine will, in a wonderful way make that constitution all over. Such cases as these only get well by a violent turmoil and by tremendous aggravations. When we approach these diseases by easy stages the patient does not get so much disorder or excitement, but is not cured so radically. Old diseases would reappear, old gonorrhoeas would be brought back, and old syphilitic states come up, ulcers attack the mucous membranes, etc. Such turmoil is likely to occur when you get a deep acting remedy, such as brings all the disease out that was lurking within.
"Attacks ushered in by a jerk in nape of neck." "Swelling of bone size of fist." "Arms became stiffened before an attack." "Numbness of left arm." "Blister in hand, which recurred annually." "Panaritium." A great many troubles occur in the extremities; paralytic affections, etc.
A warm room is unbearable; headaches and flushes of the face are made worse in a warm room or when near the stove; better from bathing or in cold air. Complaints better from putting the feet in hot water.
Trembling. Some of the epileptic attacks occur with regular periodicity, others occur irregularly. We have no remedy for epilepsy. Does that mean we must leave the human race to go on and suffer with epilepsy? We do have plenty of remedies for people who have epilepsy. A large percentage of the cases are curable.
After what has been said concerning the nature of this remedy I am sure you will read the symptoms with great interest. When you read the symptoms, they will cling around the constitution and nature of such individuals and such states as have been described. This is one of the remedies that you will need to use for the development of feeble-minded children whether there are spasms or not.
CADMIUM SULPHURICUM
Cadmium sulph. has been only partially proved, so that only a limited amount of information can be given concerning it. A medicine may be said to be thoroughly proved when it has left its impress upon all elements of man; when it has affected his memory and his intellect, when it has affected his organs and all their functions, i. e., when healthy man has taken a medicine until all these things are affected and the results are known as the effects of that medicine. Every medicine affects in some way all these elements of man, and no medicine is well proved until it is known how all these elements are affected. There is a dread of work; aversion to doing everything, mental and physical. Anxiety has been brought out more by cures than by the pathogenesis, so that it is well enough known to be classed along with Arsenicum for its anxiety; it may well be classed with Arsenicum for its prostration also; it has great weakness; it might also be classed with Arsenicum, because of the organs that are affected, especially because of its action upon the stomach, which is somewhat like Arsenicum, great exhaustion, irritable stomach and vomiting. It has such vomiting as is found in the lowest forms of fever, such irritable stomach as is found in yellow fever, with black vomiting, and just at this point is the place where the likeness to Arsenicum comes out in the low forms of the fever. But unlike Arsenicum, running all through the remedy, he wants to be perfectly quiet; part of it is a state of indolence, part of it is an aversion to motion. He is worse from motion, which makes it like Bryonia. So we will see running all through the remedy the exhaustion of Arsenicum and aversion to motion, like Bryonia.
Running through it we find it is spasmodic and nervous; it affects the muscles like Zinc. It is found in its crude state associated with Zinc. Hering made several observations whereby he tried to prove that substances found together had a relationship and illustrated it by Tellurium which occurs as the telluride of gold. It may be a fact that substances so associated are in some respects similar, but this is only a side thought, as each substance must be studied on its merits. There must be no guesswork in the study of provings. Every remedy must be used for its own symptoms, and for these there is no substitute. If a remedy does not work, the homoeopath can only examine the case anew and seek new symptoms and another remedy.
Vertigo in the room; the bed spins round. The head symptoms, anxiety and vertigo are such as occur in low types of gastro-intestinal irritation, as in continued fevers, deep-seated, slow and sluggish; in yellow fever, with prostration, vomiting of blood, black vomit. Lancinating in the head, pulsating in the temples. It is not so often called for in ordinary headaches, but in headaches occurring in the low forms of fever, with great rush of blood to the head. Cutting like knives as occurs in yellow fever.
The eye symptoms are numerous. Inflammation of a local character; conjunctivitis with discharge, long continued, a chronic conjunctivitis. Old "sore eyes," rousing up with every cold and change of weather. Thickening of the conjunctiva. Scrofulous sore eyes. Ulcer spots; old scars which break and heal up. It does wonderful work in curing old eye troubles; opacities with slow inflammation. Pressure above the eyes. Paralysis of the lids; ptosis. It commonly affects one side of the face and one eye. It has paralytic conditions like Causticum; paralysis of one part or of one side of the body. After an apoplectic attack when the patient recovers, but weakness of one arm and leg remains, it competes with Phos.
Changes in sensation here and there. Formication of the skin and deeper tissues. "Asleep" sensation, or like ants crawling in the extremities, deep in the muscles and the skin. Hyperaesthesia or anesthesia. Numbness of parts; the nose, one hand; numbness in spots. In this it is similar to Coast. Paralyzed parts are sometimes painful. Crawling in paralyzed parts.
Old nasal catarrh which has progressed till the nasal bones are being destroyed by caries. Ulceration. Pains in the bones. Sneezing; coryza, boils, abscesses.
Disturbances of the taste. It is suitable to low forms of continued fever; it has sordes, dark tongue, bleeding tongue and dry mouth, as in typhus, typhoid and yellow fever. Sluggish tongue; difficulty in moving it. Difficult swallowing. The muscles of the throat are affected causing dysphagia. Constriction of the oesophagus. Violent thirst. Every time he takes cold water, which he craves, goose-flesh comes out, a creeping or horripilation like Caps.
The stomach gives us the strongest and most important symptoms. The stomach quits business; no digestion. Everything sours; fluids and the simplest things taken are changed and come up sour, mixed with blood or bile; rancid eructations; with great exhaustion. The nausea is distressing. Nauseated all the way down to the abdomen like Ipec., Ant. t., and Ars., extensive nausea. Cold sweat. Vomiting of yellow-green mucus. Touching the lips brings on nausea. Looking over the symptoms narrated here an experienced practitioner would think of gastritis vomiting of the simplest things. Irritation of the stomach after tedious sicknesses, like cerebro-spinal-meningitis, typhoid, yellow fever. The stomach gives out; there is no digestion, and everything is vomited. He is convalescing, but his stomach is irritable. He wants to keep still. The Arsenic prostration and irritable stomach occur at the beginning of the fever, with heat and restlessness. This medicine comes in after the fever, and with his anxiety he wants to keep still. Arsenic has anxiety and wants to move from bed to bed, and from chair to chair, and .he fears death. In this medicine he seems to say: "Don't speak to me; don't bother me; let me die in peace." He wants to be perfectly quiet, and the state occurs at the close of a febrile disease. Many of these patients die because they cannot eat, but this remedy will save them. When you have a case of cancer, with burning, prostration, and vomiting, Cadmium sulph. will relieve these symptoms for weeks. I have seen them where the pains have been relieved by anodynes until nothing would stay on the stomach, and this medicine would relieve. It is a great remedy in the gastric irritation of carcinoma, a great palliative; coffee ground vomiting.
Burning and cutting pains in the stomach. Gastric symptoms, such as occur in pregnancy, in old drunkards. Burning in the stomach extending up into the oesophagus; fluids burn all the way up into the mouth and throat; sour, acid fluids. Cold sensation in the stomach. Cholera infantum with irritation of the stomach.
Pain in the abdomen with vomiting. Lancinating in the abdomen. From these pains we see it is a medicine which profoundly affects the liver, spleen, stomach and other abdominal viscera. Gangrene threatens. The main remedy in the hands of good prescribers.
Relapses in fever, with vomiting, diarrhoea, and great prostration. At times a case of yellow fever gets along fairly well, but a draft causes a slight cold and on come sudden prostration, black vomit, death. In that state it competes with Carbo veg., which used to be the main remedy in the hands of good prescribers.
CALADIUM
Caladium is a wonderful remedy; perhaps some of you have read it endeavoring to understand it; it is a difficult medicine to understand, because it is quite evident from the provings that the prover did not understand how to describe and report symptoms; did not know how to tell his sensations because they were so strange; he could not relate his mental state.
An individual puts his mind to bear upon something Which seems to have taken place during the day, but he is not quite sure whether it took place or not; he thinks the matter over, and yet he cannot be really sure whether it took place or not, until he actually goes and puts his hands upon the object thought about; proves to himself by actual contact and observation that his vague impression was so, that it was true, then he goes away and again he is undecided as to whether it was so or not. This relates to things that actually happened. "Very forgetful, he cannot remember," etc. This led to the use of Caladium for a good many different kinds of mental affections, loss of memory where there is that vague state of mind. It might be bordering upon imbecility, it might be the borderland of insanity. All day long he finds himself looking into the things that should have been done; they have simply escaped his mind; he has forgotten them. So the mind is worn through in places. A state of absent-mindedness. It may come on in an acute state, with unconsciousness. There is a good deal of congestion o f the brain, more or less excitement, but more important is prostration of the mind, weakness of the mind; feeble-minded; inability to perform intellectual work, it is impossible. He cannot think; the more thought he puts upon a thing the more fatigue he has and the further away that thing seems to be; the more he attempts it the less concentrated is the mind upon a subject. It is not strange, then, that the provers themselves were unable to put these ideas into speech so as to give us an intelligent idea of the proving. It is only by reading between the lines, using the remedy and studying it that we can straighten out this tangled skein. "Very forgetful, absentminded." There is in acute states delirium, excitement of mind, unconsciousness, stupefaction. As the febrile state is continued, we have this mental state. This remedy is useful in fevers that are continued.
One of the most important things to decide when we are going into the mental state of a remedy is whether we shall use this remedy in hysteria, in the delirium of the various phases of fever, or in insanity, and to ascertain this we turn to that part of the proving which gives us the pace of the remedy. If we want to understand the delirium of Belladonna and Bryonia to see which one would be suitable in a certain case, we turn to the febrile action of the remedy and see what the nature of that is; the pace tells us largely what find of delirium, if we do not know from the delirium itself. So we will see that in Belladonna there is no continued fever, and as a remedy must, in its very nature, be adapted to the very nature of the disease, it would be useless to follow the many injunctions that are written in our books telling us to give Belladonna in the acute form of delirium in typhoid fever; but Bryonia has just that condition; hence we will see that Bryonia is useful in such cases which present symptoms similar to it, because the pace of the disease is similar to the pace of Bryonia, which has continued fever. Belladonna has intermittent and remittent fever, particularly remittent, and hence the acute delirium of Belladonna is similar to the acute delirium of remittent fever. Now to bring this point to bear; this remedy's fever is a continued fever; it has no great amount of fever in it, but it is a continued fever; we shall see that there is coma and stupor from fever; "delirium, unintelligible murmuring;" mental prostration. This remedy is suitable in low, murmuring, exhaustive cases of typhoid fever, cases that are running a very sluggish course; not a very active delirium; but muttering; a low form of semi-consciousness, very often coma or stupefaction like Phos. ac., a dazed mind.
Forgetfulness in persons who are mentally and physically prostrated from sexual excesses or from tobacco poisoning. It is indicated in old debauches who are unable to perform the marital act. He has the most tantalizing craving for the opposite sex with no ability to perform coitus. Lascivious ideas. Such men stand on the street corner and feast upon the forms of passing girls, and their semen dribbles away; a state also found in Picric acid and Selenium. You can only cure these patients if they desire to reform, and if you can inspire them to live a better life. Without this you cannot save them, and those who take delight in such things are not worth saving, and medicine will not take hold of them. To cure, the patient must use his will to help the remedy.
Extremely nervous; afraid of his own shadow; awake all night with lascivious thoughts, apprehensions, especially before going to sleep; afraid of the future. Fear of catching diseases when they are not around. This alternates with an opposite condition. At times he is wholly incapable of appreciating danger. He will go into any sort of danger without thought. Foolish boldness. We may sum up the mental symptoms by saying he is extremely excitable.
Vertigo on closing the eyes. He cannot stand or walk with the eyes shut, but it is not otherwise sufficiently related to locomotor ataxia to be of use in that disease. Rocking, dizzy sensation after lying down and closing the eyes, as if in a rocking chair. Vertigo and nausea in the morning with stitch in pit of stomach. He opens his eyes and asks: "Where am I? What do you want around me?" The text is long with many vague symptoms. The mental symptoms are the most important.
The whole nervous system is in a state of excitement. He is full of fear; startled by the slamming of a door, or the rattling of a newspaper. Cannot sleep if there is the least noise. Things are done in great haste. Nervous excitement.
The patient in general is aggravated by warmth and the wane room, and ameliorated by cool open air. Yet he wants warm drinks in the stomach. Longs for beer without a decided thirst. Fats without hunger and drinks without thirst. Nervous fantastic things run through the remedy showing its relation to neurasthenic and hysterical patients. Eructations.
There is a sensitiveness of the skin. Crawling; creeping. He has the spider-web sensation. Sensation of a fly crawling on the face. The perspiration is sweetish, and if he is in a room with others, while perspiring, the flies will all light on him. Sweetish odour to the perspiration which attracts the flies.
Tobacco heart. The nervous symptoms of tobacco are similar to those of Caladium, and Caladium is useful in all sorts of nervous conditions, the effect of tobacco and cigarette smoking. It has a number of times turned the patient entirely away from his cigar, and removes the overwhelming craving that prevents smokers breaking off their habit. Headaches and mental states in smokers.
Itching is violent, especially about the genitals. It is useful in extremely nervous women who suffer from pruritus vulvae, keeping them awake at night, attended with abnormal excitement.
Stools, soft, yellow, pasty, mushy, as in typhoid. Stitches as from knives in the rectum. There are many urinary symptoms. Urine offensive, putrid, scanty. Pulsating in the stomach after walking; empty feeling, fluttering in the stomach. Violent sexual desire with relaxed penis. Impotency. Erections when half asleep in the morning, ceasing when fully awake. When the desire is most marked he has no ability. Automatic erections without desire, strong and painful. During an embrace no emission.
It has urethral discharge and is useful in gonorrhoea. In vigorous persons after the gonorrhoeal discharge has been improperly suppressed, sometimes impotency is the result of the suppression. Caladium has cured as frequently as Thuja. Itching eruption on the scrotum.
The most striking symptom of the female sexual organs is the pruritus; she is compelled to scratch, and the torment reduces her in body and mind.
There are some strange sleep symptoms. Kept awake by crawling. Sleeplessness from pruritus, especially of the genitals. Groans and moans anxiously in sleep so that he wakens the neighbours. Restless sleep; anxious, vivid dreams which he remembers better than the things of the day. Falls asleep and continues to dream of the same subject where he left off.
CAMPHOR
The camphor bottle is a great mischief in the house, as camphor antidotes most of our remedies. Camphor in potentized form will cure many complaints. It is suitable in some acute complaints attended with nervous excitement, even to frenzy, with spasms and convulsions and finally exhaustion. The Camphor state is one of convulsions or coldness. In the most acute period of the Camphor excitement, the excitability and frenzy of the patient are extreme, or he goes into the other extreme, in which the irritability is lost and there is loss of sensation, unconsciousness and coldness. The two extremes may be seen in one patient, one earlier and the other later. He may go from the extreme of mental excitement and violence to one of prostration and exhaustion, in which the body is blue and cold and yet must be uncovered. In the mental state there is anxiety and extreme fear; fear of persons, of strange spheres, of the dark; the dark is filled with imaginary spectres; he dare not get out of bed in the dark; everything that moves is a spectre and the inanimate things of the room become alive and terrify him. Frenzy. Coupled with this, there is kidney and urinary trouble, like that of Cantharis, and because of this similarity, the two remedies are both complementary and antidotal to each other. If a woman has poisoned herself with Cantharis, and there is present the frenzy and excitement, Camphor will act as an antidote.
The details of the mental symptoms are worthy of much consideration. The patient goes into a state not unlike imbecility, and the appearance is as if it had come on slowly. The mind and memory are gone. He closes the eyes, seemingly asleep, and answers no questions. Delirious with the heat, rage and mania, wants to jump out of bed or out of the window. Screams and calls for help. Tosses anxiously in bed. Anxiety and almost loss of consciousness. These symptoms will indicate Camphor in puerperal fever, in congestion of the brain, or in shock from violent inflammation of organs. Confusion comes from the shock and comes with violence. The more violently the patient suffers, the sooner he is cold, and when he is cold, he must uncover even in a cold room. This is somewhat like Secale. In Secale the patient, when cold, wants to uncover and to be in a cold room, and it also has frenzy, and so there is nothing in what we have yet seen to distinguish Secale from Camph. But there is another thing that runs through Camph., by which a distinction can be made. The coldness, frenzy and heat very often intermingle. When the Camphor patient is becoming cold, he has spells of heat which come over him; tisanes of heat intermingle with rending, tearing, burning pains, either in the inflamed organ or along the nerves. The patient is a most troublesome patient to nurse; nobody and nothing suits. If an inflammation of the bladder comes on, there is intense pain and tenderness, and from the shock of the suffering the mind is in a state of frenzy. Coldness then comes on and the patient wants to be uncovered, wants cold air, wants the windows open, but before all this can be done, a flash of heat comes on and then he wants the covers on, and the register turned on, and wants a hot iron and hot bottles; but this stage now passes off, and while the nurse is bringing the hot irons he wants her to open the windows and have everything cool. You will see at once that these are serious cases. This occurs with opisthotonos, convulsions, inflammation of the brain, liver, kidney, bladder, coming on from violent shock and cold with great exhaustion. You will see this in one who has worked for hours for his life, and when the excitement is over reaction sets in and it is like a whirlwind; he has worked until he is exhausted and now he is prostrated, cold and blue; here is the sphere where the old woman with her Camphor bottle has established a reputation, but potentized Camphor will do more for him than the Camphor bottle, it will put him into a refreshing sleep.
It is useful in the climacteric period with flushes of heat and sweat in a warm room; the limbs and abdomen are very cold and she suffers from cold when uncovered and sweats copiously when covered. She cannot endure covering to warm her limbs though she suffers from cold.
The head is full of pain; throbbing pain. Contractive feeling as if laced together in the cerebellum. The whole back of the head and neck throbs like hammers; worse from bending head forward; burning and stinging. Frontal headaches.
We have heard about Camphor in cholera, which is a disease that brings the patient down quickly. The face is cold, blue and shriveled, without much sweat, in the cases that would make one think of Camphor. There is not much discharge from the bowels, not much vomiting and not much sweat; but suddenly he becomes cold, blue and collapsed, as it were paralyzed and goes into a stupor.
Convulsions with frothing at the mouth. Blue lips, lock-jaw, tetanus. Cold sweat on the face with vomiting. Erysipelatous appearance of face.
There is a desire to drink without thirst. There is also insatiable thirst; he is not satisfied with incredible quantities of cold water. Cannot get it cold enough, and cannot get enough, but he soon vomits it up.
The gastric irritation is marked. Everything is vomited. The tongue is blue and cold and the breath is cold. Everything coming out of the body is cold. The air as it leaves the chest feels like that from a cellar, like Carbo v. and Verat. The tongue is cold and trembling.
Such states are found in cholera. All through the cold stage there is burning. The inside of the body seems to burn, or there is a sense of internal smarting like a rawness or a sense of burning without heat.
The pain in the stomach in gastritis is so violent that the anguish on the face is equal to that in Arsenic; a deathly anguish is felt in his stomach and he feels that he must die. Burning, rending, tearing pain in the stomach with retching and vomiting. Cramps in stomach and bowels and spreading to other parts of the body until there are convulsions and opisthotonos. Anguish at the pit of the stomach drives him to despair. Heat in the stomach. Cold feeling in the stomach. Abdomen is full of colic and burning. Cold feeling in the abdomen.
Cholera stools ; rice water discharges, with anxiety, restlessness, spasms of the muscles, cramps of the chest, prostration, increasing coldness and blueness ; wants to be uncovered and he is going into collapse. The old Camphor, Cuprum and Veratrum still hold together for Asiatic cholera. In Camphor there is prostration, blueness, coldness and yet he wants to be uncovered and the body is cold and dry.
The other two remedies have all there is in cholera, but in Cuprous there is not so much coldness, more cramping, more convulsive tendency and not so much prostration. The more cramping there is the more it is Cuprum. The more copious the discharge from the bowels and the more profuse the vomiting and sweat, the more we would think of Veratrum. Cold and dry Camphor. Cold and copious discharge Veratrum.
After taking cold there is cutting, with involuntary discharge of dark brown faces like coffee grounds. Tenesmus. At times the cholera patient, with the coldness and blueness, is retching and straining to vomit and suffering with horrible tenesmus to get rid of a little stool and has convulsions here and there. These bowel symptoms gradually increase until there is no ability to strain at stool, a paralytic condition. The rectum seems contracted and painful.
There is suffering in the urinary and sexual organs. Burning urination. Strangury. Frequent urination. Frequent desire, with difficulty. The same state arises in the bladder as in the rectum, and there is retention with horrible torture. The patient sits on the commode and strains to pass the urine, but there is a paralytic condition of the bladder. The urine is red, bloody, and comes by drops like Canth. Tenesmus of the neck of the bladder.
Camphor increases the sexual erethism to an unbearable degree. In some cases from large doses this is seen in the extreme, and in other cases the reverse takes place. It has both sexual erethism and impotency in its provings. I once knew a French woman who had an insane desire to keep her boys always at home with her, and she thought she could accomplish this if she could only keep them away from the girls; and to destroy their sexual desire she kept a bag of camphor under their pillows. All of them were made impotent. But in some provers it establishes sexual erethism. It has this like Canth.
Camphor produces a coryza, with a profuse discharge from the nose and from the air passages, from the nose to the bronchi. Bronchitis of children" and old people. Old withered up people take cold at every exposure to weather and become cold and chilly. Ant. crud., Am. carb. and Camph. are wonderful remedies in octogenarians. Every cold seems threatening. Old people don't come down with cold the same as young people; they are prostrated, sinking, have rattling in the chest and the family think it is the death rattle and that it is grandpa's last spell. These three remedies fit the case, they are like the advanced stage of pneumonia. Ant. t., Ant. c., Am. c. and Camph. cover these cases in which the hot stage is omitted. Camph. has very little heat; it has the sensation of heat; but not a marked hot stage. There are other symptoms in this medicine such as you will find in old people.
Jerking of the muscles, trembling and jerking. Spasmodic conditions with trembling. Trembling of the tongue.
The general constitutional state of a Camphor patient is coldness and extreme sensitiveness to cold. In acute inflammatory conditions he is cold and wants the covers off. In acute complaints there is violent, thirst, in chronic complaints thirstlessness. It is the same in Arsenic, in the acute thirsty, but in the chronic thirstless.
In Camphor an important thing to recall in the acute is that during the heat and when the pains are on he wants to be covered up. The coldness is relieved by cold, he wants more cold.
CANTHARIS
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
The most important feature of this medicine is the inflammatory condition, and the most important characteristic in the inflammation is the rapidity with which it develops into a gangrenous state. Inflammatory conditions usually follow a definite course for days, but when this medicine is put upon a part or taken internally the inflammatory state terminates in death of the part with great rapidity. When taken internally it proceeds almost immediately to attack the urinary tract and establish a uraemic state which brings about the mental symptoms; the local inflammatory condition comes on with great rapidity, and this brings the patient down violently sick in a great hurry. From strong doses in the poisonous effect we get startling and alarming symptoms; the whole economy is in disorder; grievous symptoms commonly of the urinary tract. The parts become gangrenous at an early stage.
The mental symptoms are striking. Among those that are guiding are sudden loss of consciousness with red face. Suddenly goes into stupor. Confusion of mind. Overwhelmed with strange ideas. Thoughts run riot, and go whatever way they will, as if possessed by outside influence.
Head hot, frenzy, delirium, with great excitement and rage, Paroxysms renewed by dazzling or bright objects, by touching the larynx or by trying to drink water as in rabies. Fear and confusion of ideas. The mind often runs towards subjects that the inflamed parts would suggest. The bladder and genitals are inflamed and the excitement and congestion of the parts often arouse the sexual instinct, so that there are sexual thoughts and sexual frenzy. Violent amorous frenzy, an excitement such as accompanies inflammation attended with thoughts that correspond. The sexual instinct has gone mad. The erections in the male are painful and violent. The penis is inflamed and sore and it would be painful to have coitus, yet there is this frenzy. Insolence. Blasphemy. Restlessness ending in rage. Restlessness causing him to move constantly, a rage and delirium intermingled with amorous frenzy: This kind of mental conduct in Cantharis is similar to what will take place in Hyos., Phos., and Secale, a violent delirious state intermingled with sexual ideas and talk. In some instances he deliriously sings lewd songs and prattles on the subject of human genitals, urine and faces, a wild raving on subjects not talked about in health except among the depraved. But in disease, chaste and modest persons, virgins, will speak so that it is surprising where they have picked up such language. In such cases it is well to exclude everybody from the room except the nurse and doctor. I have seen a dear old mother weep and wring her hands and say: "Where did my daughter learn such language?" The daughter is not to blame. It is simply a condition of the urinary tract or the menstrual function, brought on from cold or exposure, or through the mother's neglect to tell her daughter what she should know in regard to her menstrual function, and now there is inflammation of the ovaries or uterus, or outside parts, and the urine burns and causes an inflammatory condition of the outer parts, or the urine is retained and there is frenzy. Such is Cantharis.
Violent, bursting, lancinating headaches as if stabbed with a knife; an inflammatory condition that takes hold of the mind violently.
Running all through the remedy there is burning. In the head burning, throbbing and stabbing. Unconsciousness and delirium in the mental state. Burning in the side of the head. Stitches in the side of the head and occiput. Lancinating pains deep in the brain. Hair falls out.
It is seldom indicated in eye troubles alone, except such as come with head and mind symptoms. Erysipelas of the face with large blisters. Burning in the eyes and the whole atmosphere looks yellow. Burning and smarting in the eyes. Erysipelas of the eyes, with gangrenous tendency. Eyes hot, scalding tears. Erysipelas of the face, dorsum of the nose, involving the lids. Rhus is more commonly used in this condition, but when it is violent Canth. will often be indicated and preferable to Rhus. Rhus has the blisters and the burning, but in Canth. between your two visits the erysipelas has grown black, it is dusky, a rapid change has taken place, and it looks as if gangrene would set in. Burning in the erysipelatous area and the skin around burns from the touch. In Rhus this is not so. In Cantharis the little blisters even if touched burn like fire. Eruptions burn when touched, ever so lightly, i. e., those eruptions such as the remedy could produce.
This patient enters into a state of prostration, is pallid, has hippocratic countenance and dies. It corresponds to the lowest forms of disease, even gangrene and violent inflammation of the bowels, bladder, brain, spine and lungs; sinking and hippocratic countenance. Inflammation of the lungs, gangrenous type, prostration and the lung that is affected burns like fire, and immediately he expectorates cadaverous smelling expectoration, thin, bloody, watery; it has come on in an astonishingly rapid manner, and in a little while he will die; the nose is contracted, there is the hippocratic countenance, and the urine is suppressed. I remember one patient who had just come out of a prolonged drunk. I left the patient in the evening in just such a state as I have described. He was drooling a bloody saliva from his mouth and he was dying. He had had this condition come on in one night from being nearly frozen in a drunk. It would be Cantharis or death before morning, but by morning he was expectorating a rusty sputum and went on to a good recovery. Arsenic has the burning in the lungs and he spits up black sputum, pneumonia signs are present, with the restlessness and anxiety, and other symptoms of Arsenic, and Arsenic will stop it at once. These violent remedies are needed in those cases that will die.
Burning in the throat. Great thirst, with burning in the throat and stomach. Thirst, with aversion to all fluids, that is, the craving of the mouth and throat are antagonized by the mental state. Thirst in the throat and an aversion to water in the mind. Violent burning in the stomach, pylorus, abdomen. The abdomen is swollen and tympanitic; lancinating pains cutting and stabbing. Wherever there is a rapid inflammation in the bowels there is diarrhoea of bloody mucus or serum, watery, bloody fluids from the bowels and stomach. The same watery bloody fluid from the eyes. And wherever this watery fluid comes in contact with the skin it burns and excoriates. Bloody urine.
Desire for stool while urinating. The patient will sit on the commode with violent tenesmus to pass urine and stool, feels that if he could only pass a few more drops of urine or a little more bloody stool he would get relief, but no relief comes. Ã All the parts are inflamed and on fire. Tenesmus and urging not only when the bladder is empty, but often when the bladder is full. Retention of urine. Passes none or only a drop or two. Violent tenesmus of the bladder. Cutting pains with tenesmus. Lancinating, stabbing like knives, in neck of bladder. Pains shoot off in, different directions. Violent pains with frequent urging. Constant tenesmus. An anxious state and frenzy come on; most violent suffering and he has urging to pass urine and stool with sexual erethism tantalizing in the extreme. The whole urinary, organs and genitalia are in a state of inflammation and gangrene. Burning when urinating. 'This bloody urine burns like fire in the bladder and about the genitals. Retention or suppression of urine. It is rare that one suffering from gonorrhoea has this violent inflammation, with burning and tenesmus of the bladder and rectum, but in such a case this remedy is indicated. The intensity and rapidity are .the features of this remedy. It brings on pain and excitement found in no other remedy. Next to it comes Merc. cor.
In the female there is oversensitiveness of all parts. Inflammation of the ovaries and uterus. Burning in the vagina. Membranous dysmenorrhoea. Menses too early, profuse, black.
Puerperal convulsions. Retained placenta. Burning pains. When there have been no expulsive pains present to expel the afterbirth, with the symptoms running all through this remedy, after it has been given, normal contractions of the uterus have come on with expulsion of the membranes.
Violent lancinating pains through the kidneys and back. Pains in the loins, kidneys and abdomen. Pain on urinating, so that he moaned and screamed on passing a drop.
CAPSICUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Most of the substances that are used on the table as seasoning in foods will in the course of a generation or two be very useful medicines, because people poison themselves with these substances, tea, coffee, pepper, and these poisonous effects in the parents cause in the children a predisposition to disease, which is similar to the disease produced by these substances.
In the fat, flabby, red-faced children of beer drinkers and pepper eaters, with poor reaction, a relaxed and flabby constitution, red face and varicose condition, those that have been over stimulated, children of over stimulated: men, we find the sphere for Capsicum very often.
In those constitutions in which the face looks rosy, but it is cold or not warm, and upon close examination the face is seen to be studded with a fine system of capillaries. Plump and round, with no endurance, a false plethora like Cal. The end of the nose is red, the cheeks are red, redness over the cheeks, red eyes, easily relaxed individuals. These constitutions react slowly after diseases and do not respond to remedies, a sluggish state, a tired, lazy constitution. In school girls who cannot study or work, who get home-sick and want to go home. In gouty constitutions, with cracking of the joints and gouty deposits in the joints, stiff joints, clumsy, weak, give out soon. There is sluggishness of the whole economy. They are chilly patients, are sensitive to air, and want to be in a warm room. Even in the ordinary weather the open air causes chilliness. They are sensitive to cold and to bathing.
In the mental state there is no more striking thing than this symptom homesickness. A sickness like homesickness runs through the remedy and is accompanied by red cheeks and sleeplessness, hot feeling in the fauces, fearfulness. They are oversensitive to impressions, are always looking for an offence or slight; always suspicious and looking for an insult. Obstinate to the extreme; it is a devilishness. Even if she wants a certain thing she will oppose it if it is proposed by someone else. After emotions red cheeks, yet with the red cheeks lack of heat, even with increased temperature; or one cheek pale and the other red, or the cheeks alternately red and pale. Children are clumsy and awkward.
The Capsicum mind is almost overwhelmed by persistent thoughts of suicide. He does not want to kill himself, he resists the thoughts and yet they persist, and he is tormented by these thoughts. There are persistent thoughts in many remedies, and it is necessary to distinguish between impulses and desires. If he desires to have a rope or a knife to commit suicide, that is altogether different from an impulse to commit suicide. An impulse is sometimes overwhelming and overbalances the mind, and he commits suicide. You should always find out from a patient whether he loathes life and wants to die, or if he has impulses which he wishes to put aside. Some persons lie awake at night and long for death, and there is no reason for it. That is a state of the will, insanity of the will. In another patient the thoughts jump into his mind and he cannot put them aside, and the thoughts are tormenting. The distinguishing feature of the remedy is often found by differentiating between the two. Desires are of the will; impulses come into the thoughts.
Headaches as if the skull would split when moving the head, when walking or coughing. Feeling as if the head would fly to pieces; holds the head with the hand. Feeling as if the head were large, aggravated by coughing and stepping, ameliorated by lying with the head high. Bursting pain and throbbing. Headache with pulsation in the forehead and temples. Headache as if the brain would be pressed through the forehead. On stooping, feeling as if the brain would be pressed out, as if the red eyes would be pressed out on stooping.
The senses are disturbed and are overacute; oversensitiveness to noise, smells, taste and touch, to impressions, to insults. The patient is excited.
Pains in the ears; itching pain; aching, pressing pain with cough, as if an abscess would burst. It has a peculiar action on the bones of the internal ear and mastoid process. Abscesses round about and below the ear and caries; petrous portion of temporal bone necrosed. It has been a frequently indicated remedy in mastoid abscess.
Old catarrhs. The patient takes cold in the nose and throat and this is followed by a collection of mucus. Very often in stupid patients it is difficult to get symptoms, and you must depend on what you see, the character of the discharge and a few other things, and you will find that some of these cases will be cured and all the other symptoms will go away; but in some of these old catarrhs no reaction seems to come after the most carefully chosen remedies, and all at once the doctor observes that the patient has a red face and it is cold and the end of the nose is red and cold, and the patient is fat and flabby and yet has not much endurance, never could learn at school, and if she exerts breaks out into a sweat and freezes in the cold air. He has a key to the patient and examines the patient by the key, that is, by the drug, a bad practice and never to be resorted to except as a dernier resort and in stupid patients. When he gives Capsicum to that patient it arouses her, it may not cure; but after it the Silicea or Kali bich. or other remedy which was perhaps given before and did not act takes hold and cures.
In the text it says, "Nose red and hot." The skin all over is red and burning, a capillary congestion. The cheeks are red and hot, and this alternates with paleness. Red dots on the face. Pains in the face like bone pains, from external touch. Pains are worse from touch. Pain in the zygoma, or the zygoma is sensitive. Sensitive to pressure over the mastoid. Swelling in the region of the mastoid.
Taste foul like putrid water. When coughing the air from the lungs causes a pungent offensive taste in the mouth. A hot pungent air comes up from the throat, tasting foul when coughing.
On the tongue and lips, flat, sensitive, spreading ulcers with lardaceous base. The mucous membrane of the lips and various parts of the body if pinched up with the fingers remain in the raised position, showing; a sluggish circulation. This is the flabbiness of: Capsicum. It wrinkles on pressure. It is a feeble circulation. The parts you touch are loose and flabby, red, fat and cold. That child will not react well if it has measles, until it gets Capsicum. The skin is moist and cold; and there is a fine measly condition of the skin due to capillary congestion. If the child is old enough it will complain of feeling cold. There is slow reaction after eruptive diseases, after glandular diseases, after bowel complaints. The child was fat and flabby, but now does not take on flesh.
He takes cold in the throat and nose, and the throat looks as if it would bleed, it is so red, a fine rash-like appearance it is puffed, discoloured, purple, mottled, flabby and spongy-looking; dark Ted. Burning soreness with ulceration in the fauces. Uvula elongated. Stitching in throat. Enlarged tonsils, inflamed, large and spongy. The throat remains sore a long time after a cold or sore throat. Burning, pressing pain in the throat, the throat dark red; relaxed sore throat; pain on swallowing, dysphagia. Throat sluggish for weeks, a do-nothing state, does not get very bad, but gets no better, a lack of reaction: When the chill begins there is thirst. Thirst after every dysenteric stool, a sudden craving for ice-cold water, which causes chilliness. Craving for water before the chill and when taken it hastens the chill; it feels cold. in the stomach. He desires something warm, something stimulating, craves pungent things. This is seen in whisky drinkers; they crave pepper, and the pepper, on the other hand, turns round and craves whisky. These diffusable stimulants crave some stimulating thing, crave, support. Dipsomania.
Let me give you a hint in Arsenic. In dipsomania the sinners who have been drinking a great many drinks in a clay sometimes get to that state in which they must get up during the night for a drink or they will not be able to get up in the morning. In the morning the first three or four drinks will be thrown up, but the next one will stay down; they must take a number until one sticks. They have got to that state in which they must keep on taking it. If they sleep too long the first few drinks will come up, and so they must get up in the night or the whisky will not stay down in the morning until they have taken a number of drinks. You will see this in lawyers who do a great amount of work on stimulants. Nux; Ars. and Caps. will do something for them if they will co-operate with you. I remember saying to one old toper, who had kept up altogether, on champagne, that he would have to stop it. He whined, "I don't think it is worthwhile." If he could not get his champagne, he didn't think life worth living. If these people want to get benefit they must co-operate.
Dysentery. After stool; tenesmus and thirst; and drinking causes shuddering. Smarting kind burning in anus and rectum. Violent tenesmus in rectum and bladder at the same time. Haemorrhoids protruding, smarting, burning; smarting like pepper; they sting and burn as if pepper had been sprinkled on them. Tenesmus of the bladder; strangury. Burning, biting pain after urination. In old cases of gonorrhoea, in which there is no reaction. The discharge is creamy. You take a picture of his face, you notice the plethora, but also that he has no endurance, plump, flabby, sensitive to cold, red face. He does not react after cold. He has the last drop or a creamy discharge with burning on urination. Capsicum will sometimes stop it suddenly. Coldness of scrotum. Prepuce swollen, oedematous. Pain in the prostate gland after gonorrhoea. Coldness of the affected part. Coldness in patches. Coldness of the whole body.
It is Useful in perplexing and troublesome chronic hoarseness. He has had a cold and remedies for the acute condition have been given, perhaps two or three remedies, Acon., Bry., Hep., Phos., but all at once you wake up to the fact .of his chronic constitutional state of hoarseness. He is rotund, chilly, red faced, and the hoarseness disappears under Capsicum. It is the same with the cough. After making several blunders you wake up and see it is a Capsicum case and that you have never yet gotten at the root of the trouble. This shows the importance of getting at the things general first. If there is much acute suffering of course you must give an acute remedy, but if the patient has delayed recovery and convalescence is slow the next remedy should be the remedy for the patient. Sometimes it is Sulph., Phos., Lyc., and sometimes it is Caps. If the patient has a good constitutional state he will get over the cold on the acute remedy, but the old gouty, rheumatic, flabby patients need a constitutional remedy.
Cough in sudden paroxysms, convulsions the whole body: Cries after the cough from the headache. Stitches in the suffering part with the cough. Every cough jars the affected joint. The constitutional state comes first and the particulars must agree, i. e., prescribe according to the totality.
CHELIDONIUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Chelidonium is a remedy more suitable for acute diseases, though it cures certain chronic conditions. It is not a very deep acting remedy. It is about like Bryonia in its general plane, length and depth, of action. It has been used principally in gastric and intestinal catarrhs, in acute and semi-chronic liver troubles, and in right-sided pneumonia. The skin is likely to be sallow, and gradually increases to a marked jaundice in connection with these complaints. Semi-chronic gastritis, with jaundice. "Gastro-duodenal catarrh. Congestion and soreness in the liver, with jaundice. Right-sided pneumonia, complicated with liver troubles, or jaundice." This remedy seems to act throughout the system, but almost always along with it the liver is involved, and it is suitable for what the old people and the doctors called "biliousness." The patient is generally bilious, has nausea and vomiting. Distension of the veins. Yellowish grey colour of the skin.
Very few mental symptoms have been brought out in its proving, not enough to give us a good idea of the desires and aversions. We do not get a clear idea of the intellectual faculties. It needs further proving, yet in many regions it has had superabundance of proving. "Sadness and anxiety." Brooding over some sort of trouble generally runs through the mental state. "Anxiety, allowing no rest," keeping the patient uneasy day and night. Sadness, as if she had committed a crime; as if some dreadful thing was going to happen. So sad that she thinks she must die. Weeping despondency. Distaste for mental exertion and conversation. If you examine those medicines that act primarily upon the liver, that slow down the action of the liver, you will find the word "melancholia." With heart troubles, great excitement. With liver troubles, slowing down of the mental state, inability of the mind to work, sluggishness of the mind, inability to think, inability to meditate, slow pulse. Sluggishness of the whole economy. The sensorium is very commonly disturbed, and the patient is dizzy. "Things go round in a circle." Dizziness comes, and it does not let up until nausea, and sometimes vomiting, follows. "So much turning in the head that he vomits. Confusion of mind. Loss of consciousness and fainting." These are also common features with liver troubles.
The mind symptoms are present more or less with the following liver symptoms: There are pains of a dull aching character, "soreness." Bruised pains. Tenderness of the liver to touch. Aching pains, that seem to involve the whole right lobe of the liver; creating a sensation of fullness. Pressure upwards, with difficulty of breathing. Pressure downwards, sympathetic with the stomach, with the nausea and vomiting.. And then more intense pain felt under the right scapula. "Dull aching pains under the right scapula; sharp, shooting pains under the right scapula;" these complicate themselves again with pneumonia, with pleurisy. It cures pneumonia and pleurisy; it cures various forms of congestion in the liver, when these pains go from before backward, and seem to be felt through the back. "Stitching in the region of the liver, extending through to back. Hard pains felt through the back." Some patients will describe these pains as shooting pains; some as tearing pains, and others as sharp pains, going through the right hypochondrium or through the right lobe of the liver to the back. "Pains from the region of the liver, shooting towards the back and shoulders. Spasmodic pain in the region of the liver. Pressing pain in the region of the liver." In congestion or inflammation, fullness and enlargement, semi-chronic cases, or even acute, this medicine proves suitable for such conditions. The right hypochondrium is tense and painful to pressure.
This remedy has cured gall stone colic. Practitioners, who know how to direct a remedy, relieve gall stone colic in a few minutes. We have remedies that act on the circular fibers of these little tubes, causing them to relax and allow the stone to pass painlessly. In a perfect state of health, of course, there are no stones in the bile that is held in the gall bladder, but this little cystic duct opens its mouth and a little gall stone engages in it, and it creates an irritation by scratching along the mucous membrane of that little tube. When this pain is a shooting, stabbing, tearing, lancinating pain, extending through to the back, Chelidonium will cure it. The instant it relieves the patient says: "Why, what a relief; that pain has gone." The remedy has relieved that spasm, the little duct opens up and the stone passes out through the ductus communis choledochus. Every remedy that is indicated by the symptoms will cure gall stone colic.
A patient lying in bed, with great heat, extreme sensitiveness, cannot have the body touched, screaming with pain, red face and hot head, with gall stone colic, will be relieved in three minutes by Bell., but that is not at all like this remedy. Natrum sulph. and many other remedies have cured gall stone colic in a few minutes, when the symptoms agreed.
Now as to the pneumonia, it is generally of the right side, or right-sided spreading to the left. The right-sidedness is marked, and but small portions of the left lung are involved. The pleura is generally involved, and so there are stitching, tearing pains. One may not practice long before he will find a Chelidonium patient, sitting up in bed with high fever, bending forward upon his elbows, holding himself perfectly still, for this medicine has as much aggravation from motion as Bry. All of the pains are extremely aggravated from motion. This patient is sitting with a pain that transfixes him; he cannot stir, he cannot move without the pain shooting through him like a knife. The next day you will see that his skin is growing yellow. If you see him in the beginning Chelidonium will relieve him and you will prevent that pneumonia. It is not uncommon in children, and it is extremely common in adults.
Do not get confused with Bryonia. Both are violently worse from motion. Bryonia wants to lie on the painful side, or wants to lie on the back if the pneumonia is mostly in the posterior part of the right lung. In Chelidonium he is worse from touch and motion.
Bell. has that extremely painful, tearing, rending of the right lung with pleurisy, but in Bell., one cannot touch that right side, cannot press it, but must lie on the other side and he cannot move. Cannot stand a jar of the bed, because of the extreme sensitiveness to motion. I mention all three in this particular way because they have some things in common, but the remedies are different.
Chelidonium has cough with chest symptoms of the right side, liver affections, and the mental affections that commonly belong to these, violent aggravation from motion. The pains are ameliorated by heat. Pain that extends to the stomach, ameliorated by heat. Mental symptoms ameliorated by eating. Craves hot milk; hot fluids. Eating warm food ameliorates the liver, the chest and stomach symptoms.
"Bilious vomiting. Retching; bilious eructations. Nausea and retching during an attack of anxiety." These are all commonly present during the complaints described. The pains, when they become severe, seem to strike the stomach and cause vomiting. Ameliorated by something hot. "A feeling of anguish in the pit of the stomach. Persistent pain in the stomach; aggravated by motion and ameliorated by eructations. Constriction and sensitiveness in the pit of the stomach." These are all aggravated by touch and ameliorated by eating. "Constant aching pain in the stomach, ameliorated by food. Constrictive, pinching pain in the stomach better from drawing up the limbs and lying on the left side, ameliorated by eating."
It has many eye symptoms. Stitching pains. "Opacity of the cornea." Inflammations. "Bruised pain in the eyes. Right supra-orbital neuralgia." In many instances it prefers the right side.
In the face the jaundice is the most marked thing that is expressed; and, then, we have the dirty gray complexion. "Pale, dirty-yellow face."
The headaches are brought on from heat, unlike the stomach and the liver, and the lungs, etc. The head is aggravated from motion, aggravated from heat, aggravated from a warm room, aggravated from warm applications. There is where it differs from the internal or general state. There are numerous headaches. Periodical bilious sick headaches, with vomiting of bile, brought on from exposure to heat, from being overheated, aggravated from motion, wants to lie perfectly quiet in a dark room, and better from vomiting bile. Old-fashioned bilious sick headaches.
Bilious diarrhoea. Along with jaundice, clay-like, pale, faecal, puttylike stool. Bileless stool. Stool too light colored. Stool quite white in children. Diarrhoea and constipation alternate. Stool brown, white, watery, green mucus, thin, pasty, bright yellow, or grey tinged with yellow. Hoarseness. "While coughing, pain in the larynx, and pressure in the larynx."
The difficult breathing comes on with liver symptoms and pneumonia and chest troubles in general. "Difficult respiration, with short fits of coughing. Short, quick breathing. Anxiety as if he must choke. Difficult breathing; tightness over the chest as if breathing would be hindered." It has also nightly attacks of humid asthma-This is brought on from every change of the weather. All its complaints are brought on from changes in the weather. - He cannot stand weather changes, either too cold or too warm. Rheumatic complaints in the shoulders, hips and limbs, from changes in the weather.
With complaints of the liver, lungs and chest, there are coughs. They are spasmodic. The chronic cough is violent, spasmodic, dry, corning in paroxysms. "Spasmodic cough,
CHININUM ARSENICOSUM
Complaints come on at night. Open air aggravates most complaints. General increasing anaemia. Inflamed parts turn black. Chlorosis. Sensitive to cold, and complaints are worse from cold and from becoming cold. Tendency to take cold.
This is a useful remedy in weakly constitutions. Cold, pale, emaciated people. In prolonged suppuration; after haemorrhages. Chronic diarrhoea, when the weakness is the most prominent feature. Fullness of blood vessels. Dropsy in sacs, or oedema. Emaciation. Cannot sustain a physical exertion. Faints on slight provocation. Wants to be warm; wants warm drinks and warm food. Warm room ameliorates. Wants to lie down. Aversion to motion. Stitching and tearing pains. Periodicity is most marked. Pulsation all over the body. Pulse fast, feeble and irregular. Relaxed and flabby (Calc.). Sensitive to pain. Many symptoms came during sleep. Standing increases many symptoms. Sensitive to touch. Trembling. Walking in the open air aggravates. Weakness from walking. Complaints come on in windy, stormy weather.
Easily angered, and refuses to talk or to answer questions. Anxiety day and night, but worse in the evening, worse during chill; anxiety with fear. Anxiety during fever, even becomes wild. Anxiety on waking. Desires things which he cares nothing for after he gets them. Becomes critical with his most intimate friends. Complaining. Confusion of mind in the morning on waking. Over conscientious about trifles (Silicea, Thuja). Delirious at night; after haemorrhage. Many imaginations, illusions of fancy; sees images, frightful images Despair during chill, heat and suffering. Discontented with everything.
Discouraged easily, and faint hearted. Dullness of mind. Becomes excited over small matters. Exaltation of fancy. Fear at night that evil will conic to him; fear of ghosts. Forgetful. Mind overwhelmed with ideas at night. Impatience in intermittent fever. Becomes indifferent to all enjoyment. Aversion to work. Irritable during chill, and on waking. Jumps out of bed during the fever. Moaning during the chill and the fever. Loathing of life. Weakness of memory. He is easily offended, and looks for insults. Great restlessness at night, and during fever. Anxious restlessness, driving him out of bed; driving to despair. Extreme sadness, especially during chill and fever, and sometimes during the sweat. Oversensitiveness to noise, and in general.
Sentimental. Mental symptoms from sexual excesses, and loss of vital fluids. Refuses to talk, and remains silent. Sits by the hour in silence without moving. Wandering speech. Starting on falling asleep, and waking as from fright. Lies in bed in a state of stupefaction in low forms of fever. Suicidal disposition. Suspicious. Persistent thoughts. Timid. Weary of life. Weeping. The chilliness is brought on by thinking of it. The headache is worse by mental exertion. Vertigo comes in the evening, with nausea; while walking in the open air.
Cerebral congestion with great heat of the head. The forehead becomes cold and covered with sweat. Constriction of the head. Great heat in the forehead. Heaviness in the head in the morning. Motion is felt in the brain on moving the head. Sensation of rushing in the brain, down right side of the neck and arm becoming convulsive, and ending in real convulsion. Violent darting pains in the head preventing sleep. Pain in the whole head. Pain; in the morning on waking in the afternoon, but most severe at night. Nightly headaches. Cold air brings on the head pains. The scalp is sensitive to touch, to combing the hair, and to binding up the hair during the suffering. Catarrhal but ameliorated headache. Pain very severe during the chill and heat, as the sweat becomes free. Pains worse or brought on from becoming cold. With coryza the pain is violent; worse coughing or jarring, after eating. Hammering headaches. Headaches during menses. Mental exertion aggravates the headache. Nervous headache from excitement or noise. Paroxysmal pains. Periodical headaches; headache every two weeks. Pulsating pains. Pains worse walking. Neuralgic pains; worse in left side, ameliorated by rubbing. Aching felt deep in the head. Pains in the forehead, right side; in occiput after sleep; in sides of head in the evening; in temples and forehead; in vertex. Bruised pain all over the head after fever, and after sleep. Burning pain in left occipital region extending down the neck in the morning. Bursting pain. Pressing pain. Pressing in the forehead; over the eyes. Pressing in the occiput and temples. Stitching and tearing pains in the head. Perspiration on the forehead. Complaints come on from uncovering the head in cold air.
Inflamed eyes. Lachrymation. Intense photophobia and spasms of orbicularis muscles. Gushing hot tears. Large ulcers on each eye, worse from midnight until 3 A. M. Scrofulous ophthalmia, worse after r A. M. Flickering before the left eye. Pain in the eyes at night. Burning pains. Pressing. Sunken eyes. Dim vision. Sparks before the eyes. Weak vision. Noises in the ears ; buzzing, humming, ringing, roaring, singing. Stitching in the ears. Earache. Pain burning, stitching, tearing. Hearing acute. Hearing impaired.
Coryza with discharge. Dry coryza. Nasal catarrh with bloody discharge, or purulent discharge. Dryness in the nose. Epistaxis. Nose obstructed. Sneezing. Excoriation of the corners of the nose. Especially useful for periodical coryza and frequent taking cold in the nose which keeps a catarrh in constant activity.
Chlorotic face. Cracked lips. Bluish lips. Pale earthy face. Circumscribed red cheeks with pale face. Sickly color of face. faun-diced face. Expression anxious. The pains of the face are worse in the open air; burning, tearing. Periodical pains. Swelling of submaxillary and parotid glands. Perspiration cold. Oedema of face. Ulceration of the lips.
Burning canker sores in the mouth. Bleeding from mucous membranes of the mouth. Cracked tongue. Tongue black, brown, whitÂ(c) or yellow. Dry mouth and tongue. Hot mouth. Burning rawness of the tongue. Sore tongue. Salivation. Swollen gums and tongue. Taste bad, bitter while eating; insipid, metallic, saltish, sour, sweetish. Vesicles on the tongue. Pain in the teeth at night, < by biting the teeth together, from touch; cold drinks. Pains come on periodically, are jerking, pulsating, tearing, and date back to malarial fever.
Contraction in the throat. Dryness in the throat. Gangrenous inflammation of the throat with putrid odor, in malignant scarlet fever. The throat feels hot. This remedy has been used in diphtheria when the exudation was blackish, and putrid odour from the mouth. Great Pain on swallowing. Burning in the throat. Stitching in the throat. Swallowing. Difficult swallowing. Swollen throat. Constant clearing of the throat.
Appetite diminished, or ravenous. No appetite for breakfast. Strong appetite without relish of food. Aversion to rich food and fats; aversion to food, to meat. Desires wine, cold drinks, sour things, sweet things. Sensation of coldness in the stomach. Emptiness, better by eating. Eructations after eating, bitter, empty, of food, sour. Water brash. Sensation of fullness after eating. Heartburn. Great weight in the stomach after eating. Hiccough. Stomach easily disordered. Cannot digest eggs or fish. Water tastes bitter. Nausea after eating, during headache. Pain in the stomach from coughing; after eating. Burning; cramping; pressing, soreness; stitching, tearing. Pulsating. Retching with cough. Strong thirst, in the evening, during perspiration; for small drinks during heat. Vomiting at night, on coughing, after drinking, after eating, with headache; of bile, black, blood, food, mucus; sour; water. Nausea and vomiting followed by sleep. Sudden inclination to vomit at 2 P. M.
Sensation of coldness in the abdomen during chill. Distension morning, after eating, tympanitis, ascites; enlarged liver and spleen from malarial influences. Flatulence in intermittent fever. Fullness in the abdomen. Hardness of the liver. Heaviness as from a load in the abdomen after eating. Great pain in the abdomen during chill, like colic; during diarrhoea; after eating; before stool; ameliorated by lying on the abdomen. Great pain in the region of the liver, in the hypogastrium, in the region of the umbilicus. The kinds of pain in the abdomen are burning, cramping, cutting, dragging; soreness; stitching. Much rumbling and tension.
Constipation, with hard, knotty stools. Diarrhoea, morning, afternoon, NIGHT, after midnight; after cold drinks; from taking cold; AFTER EATING; after fruit; in hot weather. Dysentery. Much flatus, offensive. Bleeding from anus. Haemorrhoids. Involuntary stool and urine. Itching of the anus. Moisture about the anus. Pain in the anus during stool. Burning in the anus during diarrhoea, during stool. Pressing pain. Stitching. Paralytic weak-ness of the rectum. Ineffectual urging to stool. Stool bilious, black, bloody, clay coloured, copious, frequent, LIENTERIC, offensive, liquid, watery. Diarrhoea with intermittent fever.
Spasmodic retention of urine. Urging to urinate, frequent, ineffectual. Involuntary urination at night; after stool. Urine albuminous, bloody, burning; cloudy on standing; dark, greenish, pale, copious at night, offensive, scanty. Sediment is red and sandy. Sugar. Clear watery urine. Erections feeble. Seminal emissions.
Itching of vulva. Leucorrhoea, excoriating, bloody, copious, after menses, offensive, thin. Menses absent; copious, dark, too frequent, offensive, painful, pale, protracted; suppressed. Uterine haemorrhage. Prolapsus. Catarrh of larynx and trachea. Rawness in larynx. Soreness in larynx. Hoarseness; rough voice.
Respiration quick, asthmatic, deep, difficult in evening and night; difficult with cough; difficult while lying; rattling; short. Suffocation. Wheezing. Whistling. Suffocation in the forenoon during phthisis. Must sit bent forward by an open window in the attack of suffocation, worse in any other position. Every day at 9 A. M. Suffocation.
Cough, morning, afternoon, evening, night; after midnight; asthmatic, from deep breathing; from full feeling in chest; during chill. Dry cough, at night, during fever. Cough exhausting. Cough during fever. Hacking cough. Irritation in larynx and trachea. Loose cough. Motion aggravates the cough. Short cough. Spasmodic cough. Suffocative cough. Talking aggravates the cough. Tickling in air passages causes cough. Expectoration bloody, copious ; difficult; mucous, offensive, purulent; tastes bitter, flat, salty. Expectoration is viscid, white.
Anxiety in chest, region of heart. Constriction. Haemorrhage of lungs. Oppression of chest. Angina pectoris with dropsical symptoms. Pain in the chest, during cough. Pain in the sides of the chest. Rawness in the chest. Stitching in the chest on coughing. Stitching in the heart. Palpitation of the heart, anxious, aggravated on slight exertion, leaning back against chair; violent. Sensation as if heart ceased to beat. Full pulse. Weakness in chest. Weakness of respiratory muscles. Violent pain in left mammary region, as though part were torn with red hot tongs. Aching in region of seventh rib on inspiration.
Coldness of the back at night. Eruptions on the back. Pain in the back, during chill. Pain in the cervical region, in scapula, between scapula:, in lumbar region; in sacral region, in spine. Aching; bruised; drawing; soreness in spine; tearing. Stiffness in cervical region. Weak feeling in back.
Limbs icy cold. Upper limbs cold. Cold hands and feet. Cold knees. Cold legs. Cramps in calves. Blueness of finger nails. Eruption on limbs. Excoriation between thighs. Heaviness of limbs, of lower limbs. After prolonged suppuration in hip joint disease. Stitching in limbs, in lower limbs. Weakness of limbs, forearms, lower limbs, legs. Gooseflesh on lower limbs with chilliness. Palms hot and dry. Pain in limbs, rheumatic, in the joints; gouty joints. Pain in the upper limbs, shoulders. Pain in the knees. Aching pains in all the limbs. Wandering aching pains. Aching of the biceps of left arm. Pain in flexors of left forearm, in radial side near elbow. Burning in the limbs, in the feet. Drawing pain in the limbs, upper limbs; thighs, knees, feet. Stitching in shoulders; upper arms, hips, thighs, knees, feet. Tearing pain in the limbs; upper limbs, shoulders, elbows, wrist, hand, fingers; lower limbs, thighs, legs, ankles, feet. Restlessness of the limbs; lower limbs, legs, feet. Stiffness of the limbs; hands, fingers; lower limbs. Dropsical swelling of the hands and feet. Trembling of the limbs; hands; lower limbs. Weakness of the lower limbs. Weakness of the limbs, joints, upper limbs ; lower limbs, knees, thighs.
Sleep deep. Sleep during fever. Dreams anxious, of death, frightful, misfortune, vexatious, vivid. Falling asleep late, restless until 3 A. M. Restless sleep. Sleepiness afternoon, evening. Sleeplessness, before midnight. Sleep is unrefreshing. Wakens too early, frequently. Yawns much.
Intermittent fever. CHILL, morning, forenoon, noon, AFTERNOON, evening, night, midnight; open air; walking in the- open air; anticipating; in bed. Drinking aggravates chill. Quotidian chill; quotidian or tertian. Hard, shaking chill. Chill like cold waves with gooseflesh all over body. Warm room ameliorates. External warmth ameliorates. High fever follows chill. Fever without chill afternoon and evening. Fever and chill alternate. Burning fever. Feverish all the time, but more so at night. Dry heat at night. Hectic fever. Heat during sleep. Chill, heat, then sweat. During the heat he desires to uncover. Perspiration, morning, night; during anxiety; cold; from coughing; with weakness; during slight exertion; following fever; from motion; PROFUSE; during sleep; after waking; staining linen yellow. Fevers from living in damp rooms. Malarial fevers. Symptoms increase while perspiring. Fevers with extreme prostration.
Anaesthesia of the skin. Burning. Cold skin. Bluish discoloration; pale; yellow; jaundice every summer. Dryness. Burning eruptions, boils, pimples. Urticaria after scratching. Vesicles. Formica-lion. Gooseflesh. Itching, burning. Skin very sensitive; a feeling of soreness. Sticking. Dropsical swelling of skin. Ulcers, burning, sensitive, stinging.
CHIONANTHUS VIRGINICA
Fringe-tree
(CHIONANTHUS)
This remedy is often of service in many types of headaches, neurasthenic, periodical sick, menstrual and bilious. Taken for several weeks, drop doses, will often break up the sick headache habit. The pain in the forehead, chiefly over eyes. Eyeballs very painful, with pressure over root of nose. Hepatic derangements. Jaundice. Enlarged spleen (Ceanoth). Jaundice with arrest of menses. A prominent liver remedy. Gallstones (Berberis; Cholest; Calc). Diabetes mellitus. Paroxysmal, abdominal pain.
Head.--Listless, apathetic. Dull frontal headache, over root of nose, over eyes, through temples, worse stooping, motion, jar. Yellow conjunctiva.
Tongue.--Broad with thick yellow fur.
Mouth.--Dry sensation not relieved by water, also profuse saliva.
Abdomen and Liver.--Aching in umbilical region, griping. Feels as if a string were tied in a "slip-knot" around intestines which was suddenly drawn tight and then gradually loosened. Sore; enlarged, with jaundice and constipation. Clay-colored stool, also soft, yellow and pasty. Tongue heavily coated. No appetite. Bilious colic. Hepatic region tender. Pancreatic disease and other glandular disorders.
Urine.--Large amount of high specific gravity; frequent urination; bile and sugar in urine. Urine very dark.
Skin.--Yellow; marked moisture of skin. Sallow, greenish, itching.
Relationship.--Compare: Cinchona; Ceanoth; Chelidon; Carduus; Podophyl; Lept.
Dose.--Tincture and first attenuation.
CHLORALUM HYDRATUM
Chloral Hydrate
(CHLORALUM)
This drug, used in physiological doses, is a powerful hypnotic and cardiac depressant. It has a marked effect on the skin, producing erythema, ecchymosis, etc, which symptoms have been utilized homeopathically with much success, especially in the treatment of hives. Emotional excitability, hallucinations. Night terrors in children. Muscular prostration.
Head.--Morning headache; worse in forehead, also in occiput, on motion; better in open air. Passive cerebral hyperaemia (use 30th). Feeling as if hot band were drawn from temple to temple. Hears voices.
Eyes.--Eyes blood-shot and watery. Circles of light, black spots. Illusions of sight where eyes are closed or at night. Dim vision. Conjunctivitis, burning in eye and lids; eyeball feels too large; everything looks white.
Skin.--Red blotches, like measles. Urticaria, worse, spirituous liquors, hot drinks. Erythema aggravated by alcoholic drinks, with palpitation; causes pain in tendons and extensors. Intense itching. Surface of body stone-cold. Wheals come on from a chill; better, warmth. Purpura (Phos; Crotal).
Respiratory.--Extreme dyspnoea, with sensation of weight and constriction of chest. Asthma, with sleeplessness.
Sleep.--Insomnia, hallucinations, horrid dreams. Somnolence.
Modalities.--Worse, after hot drinks, stimulants, eating, night.
Relationship.--Antidotes: Ammon; Atrop; Dig; Mosch.
Compare: Bell; Opium; Apis; Veronal--(a dangerous drug made by the action of alcohol upon urea and contains the same radical that alcohol does. Makes a man just as drunk as pure alcohol. Staggers, cannot stand up) (Dr. Varney). (Confluent reddish spots; dermatitis, itching of glans and prepuce; circumscribed dermatitis patch on first metacarpal phalangeal joint). Luminal--(Sleeplessness with skin symptoms in migraine; lethargy like epidemic encephalitis) (Dr. Royal).
Dose.--First trituration in hives, otherwise, higher potencies. Locally, in offensive foot-sweat, bathe with one per cent solution. For its physiological effects, five to twenty grains. Use cautiously.

CHLOROFORMIUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Chloroform
(CHLOROFORMUM)
General anaesthetic, antispasmodic. Complete muscular relaxation. Weak and quick pulse, shallow or stertorous breathing. Convulsions, nephritic or biliary colic, gastralgia.
Symptoms obtained by Dr. D. Macfarlan with the 6th potency.
Great weakness, especially on right side. Limbs very tired from knees down. Much perspiration all over face and chest; drowsy and dizzy; dry lips and throat; dry tickling cough at night. Flatulence; food regurgitates; sore and bruised feeling in stomach; catching pain around heart. Sharp pain in right chest when he takes long breath; shortness of breath on exertion.
Head.--Delirium where excitement and violence predominate. Head drawn down upon the shoulders, eyes opened and closed rapidly, pupils contracted; rapid convulsive movements of face, of muscles, of extremities.
Relationship.--Ether Post-operative Bronchitis (Prof. Bier). Spiritus Aetheris Compositus.--(Hoffman's Anodyne)--(Flatulence; angina pectoris. Dose 5m to 1 dram in water).
Dose.--Higher attenuations, or sixth. Phosphorus is the remedy to give in narcosis of chloroform.
CHOLESTERINUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Cholesterine--The proximate principle--Furnished by the epithelium lining of gall bladder and the larger ducts
For cancer of the liver. Obstinate hepatic engorgements. Burning pain in side; on walking holds his hand on side, hurts him so. Opacities of the vitreous. Jaundice; gallstones. Cholesterine is the physiological opponent of Lecithin. Both seem to play some unknown part in the growth of tumors. Gallstones and insomnia.
Relationship.--Compare: Taurocholate of soda in Homeopathy.--Dr. I. P. Tessier, in an interesting study of the action of bile and its salts, in hepatic affections, analyzes a number of experiments by leading authorities, with the object of determining this action, and concludes that in the Taurocholate of Soda, homeopathy has a useful remedy against certain forms of hypoglobular anaemia. The claim that its pathogenesis and toxicology clearly indicate its value, and that it should also serve us as a remedy in cases of hypertrophy of the spleen and ganglia. He calls our attention to the fact, that it produces dyspnoea, the Cheyne-Stokes rhythm, acute pulmonary oedema, and intense exaggeration of the cardiac pulsations, offering a good field for clinical studies and experimentation of great interest, which may give fruitful and important results.
Dose.--Third trituration.

CHROMICUM ACIDUM
Chromic Acid
Diphtheria, post-nasal tumors, and epithelioma of the tongue have been benefited by this drug. Bloody, foul-smelling lochia. Symptoms come and go suddenly, and return periodically; offensive discharges.
Nose.--Ulcer and scabs in nose. Offensive smell. Corrosive pain. Ozaena (Aur).
Throat.--Diphtheria; sore throat. Tough mucus, with inclination to swallow it; worse, causing hawking. Post-nasal tumors.
Extremities.--Uneasiness in limbs. Pain in shoulder-blades and back of neck. Pain in knees and balls of feet. Drawing pain in soles while walking.
Stool.--Watery, frequent, copious, with nausea and vertigo. Haemorrhoids, internal and bleeding. Weakness in small of back.
Relationship.--Compare: Kali bich; Rhus; Chromium Sulphate (in locomotor ataxia, goitre, prostatic hypertrophy. Herpes preputialis. Wry neck. Also exophthalmic, inhibits the vagus, relieving tachycardia. Acts like a nerve tonic where there is lack of nervous tone. Fibroid tumors. Infantile paralysis. Dose for adults, 3 to 5 grains after meals and at bedtime).
Dose.--Homeopathically, third to sixth trituration.
CHRYSAROBINUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Goa Powder-Andira araroba
Acts as a powerful irritant of the skin and used successfully in skin diseases especially in ringworm, psoriasis, herpes tonsurans acne rosacea. Vesicular or squamous lesions, associated with foul smelling discharge and crust formation, tending to become confluent and to give the appearance of a single crust covering the entire area (Bernstein). Violent itching, thighs, legs and ears. Dry, scaly eruption, especially around eyes and ears, scabs with pus underneath (Mezer).
Eyes.--Blepharitis, conjunctivitis keratitis. Intense photophobia. Optical hyperaesthesia.
Ears.--Eczema behind ears. Filthy, scabby condition with tendency to form thick crust. Whole ear and surrounding tissue appears to be one scab.
Relationship.--Chrysarobinum contains chrysophan, which is rapidly oxidized into chrysophanic acid. This is also contained in Rhubarb and Senna.
Dose.--Locally, as a cerate, 4-8 grains to the ounce, of vaseline. Internally, third to sixth potency. Used externally; should be used with caution on account of its ability to produce inflammation.
CICUTA VIROSA
This remedy is of interest because of its convulsive tendency. It puts the whole nervous system in such a state of increased irritability that pressure on a part causes convulsions. The convulsions extend from center to circumference; the head, face and eyes are first affected. An aura in the stomach gives warning of the convulsion. Some complaints spread from the chest, especially from the heart; the rigors and chills begin in the chest; and there is a sensation of coldness about the heart, and from there it extends to other parts. Convulsions often begin about the head and throat and extend downward. The whole body is in such a state of tension that, after excitement, a fire rages throughout the economy and causes convulsions. Any irritation in the throat or oesophagus will cause violent convulsions in this region. On swallowing a fish bone, instead of only a pricking sensation as would occur in phlegmatic individuals, the irritation is so great that a spasm commences and spreads to other parts. It was the old remedy for tetanus and spasms caused by splinters in the skin or under the nails, competing with Bell. At the present day we find the most frequently indicated remedies for injuries to nerves are Led. and Hyper.
A peculiar feature about some of the symptoms is that they resemble catalepsy. The cataleptic condition may be present or a condition very similar to it. He recollects nothing that took place or that he said during a certain period. He knows nobody, and lies without recognizing anyone, but when asked questions he answers correctly, and subsequently he has no recollection of what took place.
It is a cerebro-spinal irritant; the head is drawn back, opisthotonos; all the limbs are convulsed and rigid. It has cured traumatic tetanus lockjaw, epilepsy, epilepti form convulsions.
With severe pains in the bowels come convulsive movements and convulsions. If the stomach is disordered or chilled, or if he has fear or other mental conditions, convulsions come on. He is extremely sensitive to touch, and touch and drafts bring on convulsions. -The convulsions spread from above downwards, and thus it is the opposite of Cupr. The convulsions of Cupr. spread from the extremities to the center; i. e., the little convulsions, merely cramps, are first felt in the fingers and then in the hands and Iater in the chest and whole body. In Cicuta the little convulsions of the head, eyes and throat spread - down the back- to the extremities with violent contortions. The convulsions of Secale sometimes begin in the face.
At times he knows no one, but when touched and spoken to he answers correctly. Suddenly consciousness returns and he remembers nothing of what has occurred. He confuses the present with the past. He imagines himself a young child. Everything is confused and strange. He does not know where he is. The faces of old friends look strange; he looks at them and wonders if they are the same persons he used to know. His house and familiar places look strange. Voices sound strange. The senses of sight and smell and all the other special senses are disturbed and confused. He is confused as to himself, his age and circumstances. A woman on coming out of the cataleptic attacks often takes on childish behavior. A man thinks that he is a child and acts like one; silly laughter, playing with toys, and other acts of childish behavior. He feels as if he were in a strange place, and this causes fear. Thinks of the future with anxiety. Mental torpor; loss of ideas and sensation extending over a certain period. Memory a blank for hours or days with or without convulsions. Convulsions generally take the place of the ecstatic or cataleptic condition. Natr. in. is somewhat similar to the mental condition of this remedy, as the Natr. in. patient goes about doing all her household work and other functions and next day knows nothing about it. Nux mos. is another remedy that has such a complete blank when going about doing things, a complete abstraction of mind.
This patient has strange desires; desires to eat coal and many other strange articles, because lie is unable to distinguish between things edible and things unfit to be eaten; eats coal and raw potatoes. Wants to be alone; dislike to society. Singing, shouting, dancing; likes toys, jumps about like a child. Lies in bed lamenting and wailing. Great agitation; child grasps at one's clothing in a frightened manner. This is likely to occur before the convulsion, great horror in the countenance, yet he has no recollection of the horror when he comes out of the convulsion. That state of anxiety and fear comes after the attack has begun, though the convulsions have not yet come on. Between the convulsions the patient is mild, gentle, placid and yielding, which distinguishes it from Strych. and Nux v. convulsions. The Nux convulsions are all over the body and are worse from touch and draft, blueness and purple color of the body, but between the convulsions the patient is very irritable. Of course, when they go out of one convulsion into another you cannot see this, but when out the convulsion the Nux patient is very irritable. The Cicuta patient, out of the convulsion, is full of sadness, anxiety, and darkness, borrows trouble from the future, is affected by sad stories, is pessimistic. He is afraid of society, afraid of company, and wants to be alone. He is suspicious and shuns people; despises others; over-estimation of himself. In this it approximates Plat., but there is no further resemblance between the two remedies. Full of fear; fright will bring on convulsions, like Op., Ign., and Acon.
Full of vertigo. The whole sensorium is violently excited. Things turn round in a circle. Vertigo on walking, glassy eyes, etc. Complaints brought on from injuries to the skull, from blows on the head. Many times there is no trouble in the region of the injury; there may be compression and yet all the pains be in distant parts; drawing of the muscles and cramps. Concussion of the brain and chronic injuries therefrom, especially spasms. Semi-lateral headaches forcing the patient to sit still erect. Headache as if the brain were loose on walking. When thinking of the exact nature of the pain it ceased. It has cured cerebro-spinal meningitis when there were convulsions and the convulsions were aggravated from touch, with fever and even spotted mottled skin. Mind and head symptoms after injuries. On going into a cerebro-spinal meningitis the patient sits in a chair talking as if nothing were wrong, when, quick as a flash, he passes into another state in which he knows no one; he falls over limp, he is put to bed, and though he answers questions he remains in a semi-conscious state, knowing no one. This may change into a spasm. The head is bent back in spasms; jerking back of the head; spasms begin in the head and go downward. Violent shocks in the head, arms and legs. Head hot and extremities cold, like Bell. in its convulsions. Sweat on the scalp when sleeping. Child rolls head from side to side. Hot head.
Convulsive action about the eyes; pupils dilated and insensible; patient lies fixed in one place, with staring, fixed, glassy, upturned eyes, like Cupr. Strabismus may be the only spasm the child is subject to from cerebral irritation. Every time the child is frightened it has strabismus; when touched or when it has cold, or after a fall hitting the head, or coming periodically, it has strabismus.
The nose is sensitive to touch. Touch and jarring bring on complaints, and hence it was so useful in, and was the first remedy for, the result of injuries and irritability and over-sensibility.
It has troubles from shaving; it is useful in such eruptions as come in the whiskers; barber's itch; a solid crop of eruptions all over the face wherever the whiskers grow. Eruptions on the cheek like eczema. Swelling of the submaxillary glands. Erysipelatous eruptions. It is closely related to Conium about the Iips and lids, in that a small amount of pressure causes induration. It has cured epithelioma of the lips.
The throat troubles are mostly spasmodic. After swallowing a fish bone or stick which lodges in the throat a spasm comes on. After Cicuta- the spasm will cease and it can be taken out. It is useful in cases of injury, accompanied with violent choking, so that he cannot allow an examination to be made.
Cold sensation in the chest. Spasms of the chest. Feels as if the heart stopped beating. Spasmodic symptoms of the back. Opisthotonos. All conditions of the limbs are of a spasmodic character.
CINA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Cina is pre-eminently a child's remedy, but it is suitable for conditions in adults that are seldom thought of. A marked feature running through is touchiness, mental and physical. The child wants something, but does not know what. The child is aggravated by touch and even by being looked at, and is worse from seeing strangers. The skin is sensitive to touch. The scalp and back of the neck, the shoulders and arms are so sensitive, that it is almost a soreness as if bruised. The hyperaesthesia is both mental and physical. The old routine of giving Cina for worms need not go into your notes, for if you are guided by symptoms the patient will be cured and the worms will go.
This patient is disturbed by everything, worse after eating even a moderate meal. The child takes a moderate supper and dreams all night, jerks and twitches in sleep, rouses up in a fright, talks excitedly about what he has dreamed, thinks it is real, and sees dogs, phantoms, and frightful things he has dreamed about. The dream is prolonged into the wakeful hours. Screams and trembles, with much anxiety on waking; whines and complains. While this little patient is aggravated by being handled yet he wants to be carried and kept busy, like Chamomilla; although not so intensely irritable as that remedy, yet be must be carried. At first on taking him out of the crib he screams when taken hold of; the first touch aggravates. This aggravation from touch and sensitiveness runs through the convulsions and fevers, with delirium, glassy eyes, drawn mouth and white ring around the nose and mouth. With a disordered stomach he has convulsions after eating, with the head drawn back and glassy eyes.
The stomach is sour and the child is always spitting up sour milk and belching sour wind. The child smells sour. The mother says that "Baby has a worm breath," but the same odour is present when there are no worms. In the convulsions there are loss of consciousness and frothing at the mouth.
Hallucinations of smell, sight and taste, in the delirious state, after taking cold, or on waking from sleep; wakes up with the delusion. Things taste and smell differently. The senses of taste and touch are exaggerated or perverted.
In some cases of internal hydrocephalus, not with enlarged skull, but with increase of the fluid in the ventricles and central canal of the spinal cord, the patients take on Cina symptoms. Rolling of the head; frequent headache; sensitiveness to jar; cannot be touched or tapped along the spinal cord without headache; always worse in the sun; the head is hot and the feet are cold in the sun. Cina will cure some of these cases. They cannot stand any kind of disturbance; it produces a convulsion. They cannot be punished because they go into convulsions. If the iter a tertio ad quartum ventriculum is closed they will be incurable, the internal pressure will go on and they will die from it. Such congenital states are incurable.
Dull headache with sensitiveness of the eyes. Headache before and after epileptic attacks and after intermittents. Before and during the headache sensitiveness of the skull. Cina children cannot have the hair combed, and the Cina woman must have her hair down in head and nerve complaints.
There is coldness of the extremities and also some itching of the skin, but the head symptoms are predominant. From slight disturbances of the mind he cannot digest, and he has diarrhoea. The complaints are aggravated in summer; the heat affects the brain, arrests his functions, and on comes diarrhoea with green, slimy stools or white stools, and the child vomits. It is pre-eminently brain in Cina; the orders are not received from the brain and so stomach symptoms develop, and worms hatch out. If he is cured the healthy gastric juice will chase the worms out.
The child turns his head from side to side. The pains are sometimes better from turning the head from side to side. You will see this in sensitive women, who must have their hair down; rolling the head relieves, not shaking as in the text, that is too violent.
All sorts of colors before the eyes. Objects look yellow. It is useful in sensitive women, sensitive nervous women, who are always worse from using the eyes, and get pain in the head and eyes from sewing. It is like Ruta in that respect, symptoms of eye-strain. It is not so much indicated in young people but more when presbyopia is beginning in middle-aged women, and there is the effort to strain the eyes on fine work or print. Rubs the eyes and can then see more clearly. On rising from the bed blackness before the eyes; different colors, especially yellow. Strabismus when worms are present, depending really on brain trouble because the worms are dependent upon that.
Face sunken, pallid, wings of nose drawn in. Blue ring or gray streak around the mouth. "A sure sign of worms," the mother says. Child rubs its nose with the hands or on the pillow or on the nurse's shoulder. Child bores into the nose until the blood comes. The sickly aspect is striking, hut it is representative of brain trouble, central trouble. The brain symptoms are the highest and most important. If frightened, whipped, or scolded, the brain is disturbed and the stomach disordered. They get indigestion and breed worms; white or blue appearance about the mouth, grinding of the teeth during sleep. Before the child has teeth it has a chewing motion, a side to side movement. Sensitiveness of the teeth to the cold air and cold water. Bleeding from the mouth and nose. Inability to swallow liquids; they gurgle down the oesophagus - before or after convulsions. When the head symptoms are present, the milk or water gurgles down the oesophagus with a gurgling cluck. This is present in diarrhoea and vomiting with brain symptoms. Ars. and Cupr. are also prominent in gurgling down the oesophagus when swallowing. Choreic movements extend to the tongue.
The child or adult is not relieved by eating, is still hungry. The stomach is loaded and yet he is hungry. After vomiting you would expect there would be an aversion to food, but there is in Cina the same empty, hungry feeling. When there is gnawing in the stomach after eating, or when the child has taken all it can hold yet cries for the bottle, or empties its stomach by spitting up and vomiting the food and then reaches out whining and crying for more, think of Cina. Shuddering when drinking wine as if it were vinegar.
Abdomen hard and bloated. Very often the Cina child will flop over on its belly and get to sleep in that way. If it is turned on the side it wakes up again. While in the mother's arms it will go to sleep with the abdomen resting on the mother's shoulder, but when she puts it on the side in bed it wakens. If you had a child with copious, gushing, violently foetid stool, ameliorated by lying on the abdomen, and it would have another stool if lying any other way, Podoph. would be the remedy. That would not be Cina. The Cina stool is not very copious, and often white.
Gagging cough in the morning. Short, hacking cough at night. Spasmodic cough. Whooping cough.
Oversensitiveness to touch; trembling, spasms, chorea. Spasmodic yawning. Child cannot sleep unless on the belly or in constant motion.
CINCHONA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Now we shall take up the study of Cinchona, or China. Persons who have suffered much from neuralgias due to malarial influences, who have become anaemic and sickly from repeated haemorrhages, are likely to develop symptoms calling for China. China produces a gradually increasing antemia, with great pallor and weakness. It is sometimes indicated in plethoric individuals, but this is the exception, and even in this class we find that the symptoms are tending towards the cachectic state, which is avoided by the prompt action of the remedy.
Throughout the body there is a gradually increasing sensitivity, a gradually increasing irritability of the nerves; the nerves are always in a fret, so that these people will say: "Doctor, what is the matter with me, I am so nervous?"
Everywhere there are twinning, tearing, cutting pains in the limbs and over the body. And so great is the sensitiveness to touch that the nerves can many times be outlined; as, for instance, the little nerves in the fingers, because of their extreme sensitiveness.
The China patient grows increasingly sensitive to touch, to motion, to cold air, so that he is chilled from exposure. The pains are brought on by exposure to the wind, by cold air, and are increased by motion and touch. Old malarial conditions that have been suppressed with quinine; gradually increasing pallor, bloodlessness, cachexia, until the patient is always catching cold, has liver troubles, bowel troubles, disordered stomach, is made miserable and sick by nearly everything he does. He cannot eat fruit without having indigestion; he cannot eat sour things. He is debilitated, pale, waxy, suffers from pains, such as are found in quinine subjects, and breaks out into a perspiration upon the least exertion.
This patient bleeds easily; bleeds from any orifice of the body from the nose, from the throat, from the uterus. And after hemorrhage complaints come on. Running through the remedy as a general constitutional state is a tendency to congestion and often inflammation in connection with haemorrhages.
Inflammation of the part that bleeds or of distant parts. For instance, a woman aborts, has a haemorrhage, but with apparently no provocation, inflammation of the uterus or of the lungs sets in. With these inflammations there is also great irritability of the tissues, tearing pains, cramping in the muscles and actual convulsions. When a China patient bleeds a little, , for instance, in confinement, right in the midst of the bleeding convulsions come on. You would scarcely need to think of any other remedy. Secale is the one other medicine that has this, but the two do not look alike. Secale, wants the covers all off and the windows open, even in cold weather. If a draft of air blows on a China patient, while in labor, she may go into convulsions. In the midst of labor the pains cease and convulsions come on. Another feature about this inflammation is its rapid progress and intensity, quickly going into gangrene. Inflammation after haemmorrhage and the parts rapidly turn black.
China has a fullness of the veins. Not exactly a varicose condition, but a sort of paralysis of the coatings of the veins. The veins become full during fever. All of these complaints are such as we find in broken down constitutions, in feeble, sensitive patients, especially in sensitive women. Sensitive to the odors of flowers, of cooking, of tobacco. Weak, relaxed, emaciated, pale, with feeble heart, feeble circulation and tendency to dropsy. Dropsy runs through the remedy; anasarca and also dropsy of shut sacs. A peculiar thing about this dropsy is that it comes after haemorrhage. In the anemic condition, directly following the loss of blood, dropsy appears. This is the typical China patient.
Catarrhal condition of all mucous membranes. Gastro-duodenal catarrh, ending in jaundice. Old liver subjects with jaundice. They have lived for a long time under the influence of the malarial miasm. Feeble, sensitive, anaemic. We see such cases in the South and Southwest, and along the Mississippi Valley. Periodicity is regarded as the most important indication for China, but it is a mistake.
Periodicity is the symptom upon which Quinine is given. China has periodicity, but in no greater degree than many other remedies and is not so frequently indicated as routine prescribers suppose. Allopaths give Quinine whenever there is any periodicity in complaints. Still periodicity is a strong feature in this remedy. Pains come on with regularity at a given time each day.
Intermittent fevers appear with regularity and run a regular course. A part of this periodicity is an aggravation at night, and sometimes sharply at midnight. In colic that comes on regularly every night at 12 o'clock, and it may be, perhaps, a week before you suspect it to be a China colic. A lady had colic and bloating of the abdomen every night at 12 o'clock. After suffering many nights a single dose of China prevented any further trouble. Haemorrhage from the nose coming on with regularity. Diarrhoea at night. Several gushing black, watery stools during the night; in the. daytime, only after eating.
There is a general aggravation after eating. Remember that this is a rhiily patient, sensitive to drafts, sensitive to cold, whose complaints are brought on by being exposed to cold air; sensitive to touch, sensitive to motion. Extreme irritability of the tissue.
China is indicated in conditions following the loss of blood and other animal fluids; as, for instance, in those who are suffering from sexual excesses, from secret vice. They have become feeble, sleepless and irritable. There is weakness and general coldness of the skin; twitching and jerking of the limbs; drawing and cramping in the muscles; chronic jerking; epileptiform convulsion; paralytic weakness; rush of blood to the head; ringing in the ears; darkness before the eyes; fainting on the slightest provocation. Such is the China cachexia, and with this in view, the mental state will scarcely be a surprise to you. It is just such as you would expect in this nervous, sensitive patient. Weakness of mind.
Inability to think or remember. Full of fear at night. Fear of animals, dogs, of creeping things. Wants to commit suicide, but lacks courage. Gradually the mind grows weaker; he uses wrong expressions or misplaces words. Lies awake at night making plans, theorizing, building air castles, thinking of the wonderful things he is going to do some day. In the morning he wonders how he could have thought such foolish things. After sleep his mind is clear and he looks more philosophically on the affairs of life.
Unable to entertain any mental proposition that means work. He dreads work. He is apathetic, indifferent, low spirited, silent, disindined to think. He is unable to control the mind. to make it do what he wants it to do. You see it is not as yet a real insanity.
This state of mind comes on after haemorrhage. Insomnia after haemorrhage. A woman, after having suffered great loss of blood, will be sleepless night after night. After haemorrhage we may have dizziness. It is a natural consequence; dizziness and fainting. But ordinarily, after the proper diet for a few days, these symptoms will have disappeared. With the China patient they go from bad to worse. The woman after severe hemorrhage does not make blood. There is mal- assimilation, and the vertigo persists for days and weeks. China will restore order.
The remedy is full of headaches. Congestive headaches in broken down constitutions. Extremities cold and body covered with a cold sweat. Rending, tearing pains. Pressing and throbbing. As soon as the air strikes the head those pains come on. Headache better in a warm room; worse from touch; worse from motion; worse from cold. These are the principal features. A slight touch will aggravate the disturbance. But notice the exception. Hard pressure ameliorates the Chin pains, as light pressure aggravates. Sensitiveness of the tissues; sensitiveness along the course of the nerves; the pains are brought on by touch, by cold air. Stitches in the head with pulsation in temples, which can be felt with the fingers; ameliorated by hard pressure, but aggravated by touch. The jar and motion of walling hurt the head. Even turning over in bed aggravates.
Cannot ride in a carriage or anything that jolts. Ameliorated by hard pressure. Throbbing headaches, aggravated by a draft of air, in the open air, from the slightest touch; ameliorated by hard pressure. The scalp feels as if the hair was grasped roughly. It is sensitive to touch. Profuse sweating of the scalp. Headaches aggravated at night. Headaches from sexual excesses; loss of animal fluids. Now we come to the eye. Photophobia. Yellowness of the sclera. Exposure to cold wind will bring on neuralgia; ameliorated from keeping quiet and from keeping warm. "Nocturnal blindness, dimness of vision. Feeling as if sand were in the eyes. Pains worse from light. Better in the dark."
In the ear and the nose you find the same sensitiveness as in eyes; every little noise is painful. Ringing, roaring, buzzing, and singing, chirping like crickets in the ears. Dry catarrh of the middle ear. Hardness of hearing is not infrequently the result of this condition. It gradually increases until there is total deafness, and the noises in the ear continue long after the patient has lost the ability to distinguish articulate sounds. Hemorrhage from the ear. Offensive, bloody, purulent discharges. Frequent nosebleed in anemic patients. Here, again, the dryness and catarrhal conditions. Dry coryza; or fluent coryza, suppressed and causing violent head pains. Odors nauseate. Sensitiveness to the odors of flowers, cooking, tobacco.
The face is withered, shrunken, sallow, anaemic, sickly. Red when the fever is on and sometimes when the chill is on, but in the apyrexia pale, sickly and sallow.
Neuralgia of the face; tearing, rending, knifelike pains with the usual modalities. The veins of the face are distended. This is frequently observed during the fever and sweat of the China intermittents.
The teeth get loose, the gums swell. The teeth are painful while chewing; they feel too long. Toothache with every little cold. Rending as if teeth were being pulled out, every time the child nurses at the breast. Exudations about the teeth and gums. Black, and foetid; great putridity in the lower forms of fever.
The taste is extremely acute. Exaggerated so that nothing tastes natural. Bitter taste in the mouth. Food tastes bitter or too salty. Burning as from pepper on tip of the tongue. Dryness in the mouth and throat. Difficult swallowing."
Sometimes there is canine hunger, but one of the most common features is loathing of everything; aversion to all food. The China patient is often passive in regard to eating. Sits down to eat and the food tastes fairly good and he fills up.
But it does not matter much whether he eats or not. "Loathing and violent hunger." "Hungry and yet want of appetite. Indifference to eating and drinking. Only while eating some appetite and natural taste for food return. Loss of appetite. Aversion to all food. Aversion to bread." His appetite varies. Thirst is peculiar. The patient will say: "I know my chill is coming on now because I have thirst." Thirst before the chill, but as soon as the chill comes on there is no thirst.
But when he begins to warm up he begins to get thirsty; that is, during the period in which the two lap he is thirsty, but when the chill has fairly subsided and the heat is upon him his thirst subsides also and he only wants to wet his mouth. But as the hot spell begins to subside he increases the amount taken, and all through the sweat he can hardly get water enough. Thirst before and after the chill and thirst during the sweat. No thirst during the chill. No thirst during the hot spell. You will cure more cases of intermittent fever with Ipecac and Nux vomica, than with China. China has well-defined chill, fever and sweat. Gastric symptoms from eating fish, fruit, and from drinking wine. Flatulent distension almost to bursting. There are constant eructations, loud and strong, and yet no relief, so extensive is the flatulence. In Carbo veg., after belching a little, there is relief. Lyc. has both. Tympanitic distension of the abdomen and stomach in low forms of fever. Cannot move on account of soreness in the bowels. Vomiting of blood. Sometimes followed by dropsy of the extremities.
"Hiccough. Nausea. Vomiting. Eructations, tasting of food, or they are bitter, sour. Frequent vomiting. Vomiting of sour mucus, bile, blood." Likely to occur at night. Pulsation in the stomach and rumbling. Cold feeling in the stomach.
Fermentation after eating fruit. Acidity. Disorders of the stomach after milk. Diarrhoea. Copious, watery, black discharges from the bowels. Gurgling and rumbling in the abdomen. Stool immediately after eating and at night. Great quantities of flatus expelled from the bowels. Diarrhoea comes on gradually.
Stools more and more watery. Chronic diarrhoea, with emaciation and aggravation at night. Petroleum has a chronic diarrhoea, but only in the daytime.
Of the male genital organs the most striking feature is weakness. Of the female genital organs there is a different class of conditions. In the woman who has been subject to uterine hemorrhages you may look out at any moment for a sudden, sharp attack of inflammation of the ovaries. Haemorrhage from the uterus. Prolapse. Menses-too early and too profuse; black, clotted blood; menstrual colic; metrorrhagia. Pains and convulsions; convulsions come on in the midst of the haemorrhage; cramps in the uterus along with hemorrhage; labor-like pains; ringing in the ears; loss of sight; sliding down in bed. In confinement the lochia is profuse and lasts too long. Deterioration of health from prolonged lactation; toothache; neuralgia of the face.
Difficult respiration, rattling and filling up of the chest with mucus; asthma. "Pressure in the chest, as from violent rush of blood; violent palpitation, bloody sputa, sudden prostration." Dry, suffocative cough at night; profuse night sweats. Pains in the chest, increasing sensitiveness to cold, heat and redness of the face with cold hands.
Along the spine there are sore spots. Tearing, darting pains in the limbs, ameliorated by heat and hard pressure, brought on by touch, by becoming chilled. Worse at night. "Knees weak, especially when walking." China cures low forms of fever, remittent or intermittent, typhoid or malarial.
CISTUS CANADENSIS.
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This remedy is an antipsoric, a deep-acting remedy. It runs very close to Calcarca, but is milder in its action. It has the same exhaustion from exertion, dyspnoea, sweating and coldness that we find in Calcarea.
What will forcibly call your attention to a remedy will be the curing of a bad and typical case. I remember the first time my attention was decidedly called to Cistus. I had put it on my list to study from time to time and had come to the conclusion that it was only a side issue, until a young lady, nineteen years of age fell under my observation. The glands of the neck were large and hard, the parotids especially; she had foetid otorrhoea; her eyes were inflamed and suppurating; there were fissures at the corners of the eyes; her lips were cracked and bleeding, and she had salt rheum at the ends of the fingers. I could not make Calcarea fit the patient, but after much study this little remedy seemed to be lust what I needed; and although she had had an immense amount of Homoeopathy, good and bad, this remedy cured.
The glands inflame, become swollen and suppurate. It causes caries and cures old ulcers. It has a scrofulous constitution. It is useful in chronic diarrhoea, with enlarged glands, even in those who are flabby, sickly and pallid and who cannot go upstairs without losing their breath. All the mucous membranes throw out a thick, yellowish, offensive mucus and hence it is suitable in old and troublesome catarrh. The chest fills up with mucus and he feels relieved after expectoration, but after he empties the chest it feels raw. It has eruptions, herpes, tetter, scaly eruptions, salt rheum on the hands and ends of the fingers, with cracking and bleeding of the fingers in winter and from washing in cold water.
All its complaints are worse from mental exertion. He is excitable. His cough, headache and pains are worse from mental exertion. Pains shoot from the head to the ear. Shooting, stitching, tearing pains in inflamed parts. Old discharges from the ear date back to eruptive diseases. He feels as if paralyzed after mental exertion, and mental excitement increases his sufferings, like Calcarca and Borax. If he is compelled to fast headache comes on, and like Lyc., the headache will be relieved after eating. Frontal headache with coldness. In a warm room the perspiration comes out, and it is cold, and the more he sweats the colder he gets. Pain in the forehead with cold sweat, and the colder he gets the worse the pain becomes. Sick headaches and great prostration with the headache. Sensation of internal coldness of the forehead, especially in a warm room. Pressing pain at the root of the nose with headache. The parotid gland is so much enlarged that it pushes the head to one side. The glands of the abdomen swell with chronic diarrhoea, and the swelling may be tuberculous. Enlarged glands, with or without eruptions.
All over the body there is a sensation of crawling; formication; tingling and creeping like ants, and no eruption. He scratches till the skin is raw trying to get relieved of the itching and prickling. Eruption upon the face; eczema. Eruptions about the ear.
Cold feeling or burning in the nose. This is difficult to distinguish. In acute coryza the nose fills up with thick, yellow mucus, and when this is blown out it leaves the nasal cavity empty, and there is irritation; one will say it is a rawness, another will say a coldness, and another will describe it as a burning. There is relief when the nose fills up again with mucus. In Ars. the mucus in the nose is so acrid that it burns, but in Ant. c., Aesculus, and in this remedy when the nose is empty there is a burning or rawness. The sensation of rawness, coldness or burning is caused by the inhalation of air. An epidemic of coryza was pervalent, and this was the strongest symptom-the pain caused by inhaling air, great burning from inhaled air. But it is not in the acute coryza that we see the value of this remedy, it is in the old, chronic case, with thick discharge, and a cold feeling or burning in the nose when inhaling air.
"Sharp shooting, intolerable itching and thick crusts, with burning on right zygoma." This remedy has cured lupus on the face. Caries of the lower jaw. Open, bleeding cancer on the lower lip. Lupus exedens. Pain in all the joints of the face. It cures old, deep-seated, eating ulcers about the ankle and shin, with copious acrid discharge, formication and swollen glands, aggravation from bathing, extreme sensitiveness to the open air, only comfortable when very warm.
The teeth have all sorts of disturbances; the gums settle away, the teeth become loose; scorbutic gums. The same cold feeling is described in the throat as in the nose smarting and coldness. Mouth and throat full of mucus. The throat feels rough, as if full of sand. Dry spots in the throat. The throat looks glossy, shining as if varnished, in old atrophic catarrhs. Every cold settles in the throat. Hot air feels good everywhere. In old cases there is trouble with scrofulous glands, which are enlarged, and the patient wants the heat; goes to the register and turns the heat on, wants to feel the heat in the nose, throat and lungs. Patients going into tuberculosis have that desire for heat; chilly persons. They do not feel cold to touch, but they are cold subjectively, chilly. Hawking of gum-like mucus, especially in the morning, fauces inflamed and dry. Suppuration of the glands of the throat.
These patients crave pungent things, and especially want something to warm them up, something to build them up, something stimulating; herring, cheese; something "strong."
"Chronic induration and inflammation of the mammae. Left mamma inflamed, suppurating, with a feeling of fullness in the chest. Sensibility to cold air," with the inflamed glands. We see its tendency to produce enlargement of the glands, and this would make us think of it in growths with involvement of the glands all around. The glands of the neck are enlarged in lines, like knotted rope, as in Hodgkin's disease. Only a limited number of remedies have this knotting. Itching of the skin and mucous membrane. The itching in the ear is not relieved by scratching, and the part is raw from the constant rubbing and scratching. The eyes constantly itch. In the throat there is continuous itching. In the chest there is a constant tickling, causing cough. At the anus and all other orifices there is itching, and the itching parts are rubbed until raw and bleeding.
Scrofula; swelling and suppuration of the glands of the neck. Eruption on the back like shingles. Scrofulous ulcer on the back. Burning, bruised pain in the coccyx, worse from touch. That is like Carbo an., in which the coccyx burns when pressed on, especially after a slight injury in a nervous woman.
Tetter on the hands; blisters oozing after scratching. Diseases of the nails. Hard, thickened places on the hands of workmen, with deep cracks.
The febrile symptoms have not been sufficiently brought out. In chronic cases there is copious sweat with exhaustion. Night-sweats.
CLEMATIS ERECTA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Clematis has only been partially proved, and consequently it applies only to a few conditions, but these are very important, so that it cannot be passed over. It has vesicular eruptions almost erysipelatous in character. One almost constant mental state is that he fears to be alone, yet dreads company. He dreads the necessity of having company, and it seems that the atmosphere is full of frightful and distressing things to worry him. This makes him low-spirited. The remedy seems to fit the sycotic constitution in its mental state and its generals. It seems to be fitted to those who had gonorrhoea recently suppressed, because after that suppression will cone on this mental state with inflammation of glands.
It is rather singular about the eruptions. One would not think that from so harmless a little shrub so much trouble would come; but there are persons who are just as sensitive to this vine as to Rhus, and it resembles Rhus to a great extent in its manifestations. It produces just as poisonous a condition as Rhus.
Here I might speak of several remedies which relate to the Rhus poison. There are many vesicular remedies that look like Rhus, and all of them you will have to use more or less in their antidotal relations to each other, but it is well to be sure in a given case which one of them produced the poison. Croton tig., Rhus, Ranunculus, Anacardium and Clematis at times look so much alike that I am unable to tell them apart by their eruptions. They are all similar enough to each other to become universal antidotes. The others are all deeper acting than Rhus.
The Ranunculus, the little buttercup, has cured epithelioma of the lids. It has cured cancerous affections, so we say it goes deep into the tissues. " On the outer head we have a part of the manifestations of Clematis; vesicular eruptions with great itching, stinging and crawling. Now what is true of the eruption here will be true of the Clematis eruption everywhere. It is aggravated from washing. It will smart and burn, and a quasi-inflammation will set in from washing. Contrast this with the internal features of the remedy. In the teeth and jaws the pain is violent, but while the eruption is made worse from cold applications, the pain inside the jaw and the teeth is relieved by cold water held in the mouth, and aggravated violently from heat, and from the warmth of the bed. The eruption is aggravated from the warmth of the bed, and also from cold washing. We have to go into the details a little to see whether an eruption is Rhus or whether it is Clematis, or something else. Vesicular eruptions filling with yellow fluid and with induration under the vesicles. It produces eruptions very closely related to herpes and eczema, and they spread. About the eyes we have vesicular eruptions. If seen in one stage it will be vesicular, and if later, it will be seen as an ulceration. Simple and graver forms of herpes. Herpes zoster about the body. Burning and smarting of the eyes; worse from dosing them.
Inflammation of the iris. Eyes inflamed, protruded, dim. Chronic irritation of the lids." The pains in connection with the teeth are aggravated from the warmth of the bed, which is general ; they come at night, are aggravated from warm things held in the mouth and ameliorated from holding cold water in the mouth.
Stitching and drawing pains in the teeth; worse at night; better for a short time from holding cold water in the mouth; better from drawing in cold air; worse from the warmth of the bed. The toothache is tolerable during the day, but as soon as he lies down in bed and assumes a horizontal position it increases to an intolerable degree. Pain in hollow tooth, better by cold water or drawing in cold air.
Swelling of the glands of the groin is a striking feature even when connected with scirrhus. It is connected also with suppressed gonorrhoea, and with rheumatism of the joints. Pain and swelling of the right spermatic cord; this is worse at night, worse from walking and from the warmth of the bed. While it has both sides, strange to say there is more trouble in the glands that are on the right side of the body than on the left. It has produced much trouble in the bladder.
Constant urging to urinate, most painful tenesmus. Flow stopping and starting. The urethra is painful to pressure. Micturition is remarkably slow, only a feeble stream because of the smallness of the urethra.
It is the nature of this remedy to infiltrate and inflame tissues, hence it is useful in those cases of gonorrhoea where they have been slow in passing away, where they have been treated by injection. That slow inflammation of the urethra will infiltrate and the urethra feels like a large whip-cord, painful upon pressure, and this goes on until the canal is almost closed. You will be surprised to find, when Clematis is indicated, that after giving that remedy the discharge is re-established, and soon the old stricture goes away. At the end of two or three months he feels nothing of it.
A striking feature in connection with the urine, bladder, etc., is that the patient cannot quite empty the bladder. He always feels as if there was a little more, and when he appears to have finished it will keep dribbling away. This is a common feature of stricture. "Inability to evacuate all the urine at once. When beginning to urinate it burns the worst, while urinating it sticks in urethra, and after urinating it still continues to burn. Discharge from the urethra of thick pus." It is seldom indicated in the very first stage of gonorrhoea during the highest inflammation, but in those cases that are inclined to hang on. Then come the sequelae if gonorrhoea be suppressed. Inflammation of the testes is common, and this is one of the medicines suitable. Strange to say, the right side of the body is more commonly affected than the left. Intermittent flow of the urine. Urine stops and starts with the chordee still present. The right spermatic cord is very sensitive. Pain in the testes, drawing. Painful, inflamed and swollen testes.
Orchitis with much painful swelling and hardness. Now when the swelling has gone down perhaps you gave Puls., which was the remedy for the time, but it did not finish the case there is induration of this portion. Swelling of the right half of the scrotum with thickening and hanging low down.
Provings have not been made very much in women, which is to be regretted, because it would be well to know if this remedy affects the ovaries as it does the testes. It has been clinically used, and has cured many troubles in women, especially inflammation in the mammary gland. "Ulceration and hardness of glands. Scirrhus of the breast with induration and ulceration. Scirrhus of the left mamma with stitches in the shoulder ;" this is a clinical symptom, "worse in the night." She cannot bear to be uncovered. It has rheumatic conditions of the limbs from suppressed gonorrhoea. Great nervous weakness and twitchings of the muscles. It has pain on lying down and preparatory to going to sleep. An electric shock; twitching, jerking, as if a faradic battery has been turned on. It has also a general febrile condition, but nothing very striking.
Vesicular eruptions on the body. Herpetic eruptions here and there; it has a herpetic constitution. "Eruption of vesicles and pustules; from the former exuded a dear, watery secretion, from the latter a purulent fluid." Yellow vesicles and yellow pustules. Both are common to this remedy. "Dark, burning eruptions with violent itching." Herpes that ulcerate. Ichorous, spreading ulcers.
COCCULUS INDICUS
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
We will study the general system and the mind as usual. Cocculus slows down all the activities of the body and mind, producing a sort of paralytic weakness. Behind time in all its actions. All the nervous impressions are slow in reaching the centers. If you pinch this patient on the great toe he waits a minute and then says "oh," instead of doing it at once. In response to questions he answers slowly, after apparent meditation, but it is an effort to meditate. And so with all nervous manifestations, thought, muscular activity, etc. He cannot endure any muscular exertion, because he is weak ; he is tired. First comes this slowness, then a sort of visible paralytic condition, and then complete paralysis. This may be local or general. There are certain causes which produce these effects. A wife nursing her husband, a daughter nursing her father, becomes worn out by the anxiety, worry and loss of sleep. She is exhausted; unable to sustain any mental or physical effort; weak in the knees, weak in the back, and when the time conies for her to sleep she cannot sleep. Sickness brought about in this manner is analogous to that caused by the Cocculus poison, and hence Cocculus from the time of Hahnemann to the present time has been a remedy for complaints from nursing, not exactly complaints that come on in the professional nurse, for Cocculus needs the combination of vexation, anxiety and prolonged loss of sleep, such as you have in the mother or daughter who is nursing, or the nurse when she takes on the anxiety felt by a member of the family; a wife nursing her husband through typhoid, or other long spell of sickness. At the end of it she is prostrated in body and mind, she cannot sleep, she has congestive headaches, nausea, vomiting and vertigo. That shows how a Cocculus case begins. One who is thus exhausted in body and mind goes out for a ride. She gets sick headache, pain in the back, dizziness, nausea and vomiting. She gets into the car to take a journey. Sick headache comes on. She goes on a mile or two and will have nausea, vomiting and sick headache. She feels weak all over, feels as if she would sink away.
The Cocculus patient gets into a wagon to ride, sick headache, nausea, vertigo come on. The Cocculus patient cannot endure motion. Aggravated by talking, by motion, by the motion of the eyes, by riding. Wants plenty of time to turn the head cautiously to see things. Wants plenty of time to move, to think, to do everything. The whole economy is slowed down, inactive.
Tremulous, tired, excitable. The hands tremble when taking hold of anything, or he takes hold of it awkwardly and drops it. Incoordination runs through this remedy, and hence it has been used with good effect in locomotor ataxia. It has staggering and numbness. Numbness is quite a feature of this remedy. Numbness of the lower extremities, in the fingers, in the shoulder, of the side of the face. Complaints from anxiety.
Extreme irritability of the nervous system. The least noise or jar is unbearable. You have heard that Bell. is worse from a jar. So is Cocculus, and quite like Bell. Cocculus is also like Belladonna in its sleeplessness, and other general conditions. This sensation of seasickness and dizziness is sometimes felt all over the body; a sort of faint feeling which is followed sometimes by loss of consciousness, or a paralytic rigidity. Stiffness of the joints is a common feature in Cocculus. It belongs to the limbs in general. But it is such a strong symptom I will mention it here. Limbs straightened out and held there for a while are painful when flexed. Persons who have been suffering from anxiety, prostrated, will lie on the back, straighten out the limbs, and can get up only with great difficulty. The doctor comes and he discovers what is the matter. He bends the limbs and she screams, but she is relieved after the bending, and then she can get up and move about. You cannot find that anywhere else. It is entirely without inflammation. It is a sort of a paralytic stiffness, a paralysis of the tired body and mind. The Cocculus headaches and backaches, pains and distress are present. A man will stretch out his leg on a chair and he cannot flex it until he reaches down with his hands to assist. Such things are strange. Faintness on moving the body, fainting from pain in the bowels, from colic. With all this slowing down of the thoughts and activities the patient remains extremely sensitive to suffering, sensitive to pain.
Spasms through the body like electric shocks, convulsions after loss of sleep. This patient goes on with nervousness and excitement, anxiety and loss of sleep until convulsions supervene. Tetanus. Cholera, attacks of paralytic weakness with pain, paralysis of the face, of the eyes, paralysis of the muscles everywhere, paralysis of the limbs. Even diphtheria has been known to induce a state very much like I have described as due to loss of sleep and anxiety. I remember a case of paralysis of the lower extremities that was prescribed for by a very careful homoeopathic physician many years ago. It was one of the things that surprised me in the early days of my prescribing and observation. It was the case of a little girl with paralysis of lower extremities after diphtheria and no hope was given. But Doctor Moore (he was then an Octogenarian) looked over the case. I was acquainted with the family and with the doctor. He studied the case carefully and gave Cocculus c.m. It was not many days before the child began to move the legs, and the condition was perfectly cleared up, and I have never ceased to wonder at it. It was a good prescription, perfectly in accord with all the elements of the case. Doctor Moore was one of the pupils of Lippe and Hering.
You can readily see what is coming when the mental activities are slowed down, from anxiety, and loss of sleep, such as we have in nursing. The mind appears like approaching imbecility, and as you look upon the true Cocculus case you wonder if that patient has not been growing insane for a year or two, because the mind seems almost a blank. He looks into space and slowly turning the eyes toward the questioner answers with difficulty. It occurs in nervous prostration, in typhoid fever. It is so nearly like Phos. acid that the two remedies must be carefully individualized. Time passes quickly. He cannot realize that it has been a whole night. A week has gone by, and it seems but a moment, he is so dazed. Slowness of comprehension; cannot find the right word to express his thoughts, so slowly does his mind work ; what has passed he cannot remember; forgets what he has just read; cannot talk ; cannot bear the least noise; cannot bear the least contradiction. The tongue will not respond. There is confusion of mind and difficulty of articulation. An idea comes into his mind and becomes fixed. He cannot convert it or move it, but it just stays there, and if he speaks he will say something that will cause you to realize that that same idea is holding on to him. So he appears to be in a state of imbecility. Mental derangement with vertigo. With most all the mental symptoms there is vertigo. He lies in a state of apparent unconsciousness, yet knows all that is going on and at times is even able to remember and describe what was going on, but does not even wink; does not move a muscle. There is an appearance of ecstacy, a smile upon the face. Knows what is going on, yet with complete relaxation of the muscles without speech or apparent recognition of anyone. Perfectly relaxed, and yet knowing what is going on. That resembles catatonia. Unable to think. Fears death. Feels as if some awful thing was about to happen. All this is the result of grief, anxiety, vexation, prolonged loss of sleep. The vertigo is usually attended with nausea. A Cocculus case cannot look out of the car window, cannot look down from the boat and see water moving, without nausea immediately.
Perhaps you can even now surmise what the head symptoms are to be. With the headaches come dizziness, extreme nausea and gastric symptoms. Headaches brought on from riding in a wagon or riding in the cars or on shipboard; headache from motion. Cannot accommodate the eyes to moving objects; dizziness and whirling and headache. Congestion of the head, pressing, .throbbing, headache. Headache as if the skull would burst, or like a great valve opening and shutting. Sick headache with vertigo. Headache again from working in the sun. Sick headache from riding in a carriage.
Dim sightedness and disturbance of vision. Paralytic weakness of the muscles of the eyes, as well as the muscles of accommodation. The face becomes pale and sickly. Pale as death, with pains in the face, vertigo and nausea. Tearing pains in the face. Neuralgia of the face. Face bloated. Quivering and twitching of the muscles of the face. Paralysis of the muscles of the face. Numbness of the face. Twitching, jerking, numbness, paralysis, tearing pains. Prostration and nervous exhaustion accompany most of the complaints of Cocculus.
Stomach symptoms. Loathing of food. Metallic taste in the mouth. Bitter taste in the mouth. Sour, nauseous taste in the mouth, and no food tempts him. He lies there sick with a little fever or a "cold." Headache, vertigo, nausea, loathing. Intermittent fevers with pains in the limbs, especially in the knees and bones of the legs, with that peculiar stiffness, nausea, and loathing of food. In intermittent fever or perhaps a low typhoid state, we have this loathing of food with nausea. You go to the bedside and you ask the nurse, "What have you been feeding the patient?" and the patient gags. The thought of food makes the patient gag. The nurse will say that every time she mentions food the patient gags. The thought of food or the smell of food in the other room, or in the kitchen, will nauseate the patient. These two medicines are Cocculus and Colchicum.
Paralytic conditions. Paralysis of the oesophagus. Cannot swallow. "Paralytic condition of the throat after diphtheria." Sore throat with low forms of fever. The fever is gone but the patient does not rally, there is much nervous trembling, numbness, twitching of muscles and great weakness. Sensation as though a worm were crawling in the stomach. Spasms of the stomach. Violent attacks of gastralgia, violent cramp of the stomach. Griping, pinching, constrictive pain. The pain in the bowels feels as if the intestines were pinched between sharp stones. This causes fainting and vomiting. Colicky pains in the bowels; great distension of the abdomen, such as is found in typhoid fever; tension of the abdomen after drinking; flatulent colic. Tearing, cutting, spasmodic pains in the bowels. Radiating pains in the bowels accompanying . diarrhoea. A paralytic condition of the rectum. Inability to press at stool. Urging to stool and burning in rectum. Disposition to stool, but peristaltic motion in upper intestines is wanting.
Copious menstrual flow, menses too soon; last too long. Catamenia two weeks before the time. In women prostrated from grief and from anxiety, and from prolonged loss of sleep, menses come too soon, are copious and prolonged. Headache, vertigo, nausea. Violent, cramping pains in the bowels, clutching pains in the uterus during menstruation. Again, just such a patient as described will have a suppression of the menstrual flow, or for, weeks and months will have no menstrual flow; or just at the time the menstrual period should come on there is a copious leucorrhoea that takes the place of the menses. The woman is emaciated, and grows more and more sickly and chlorotic. The face is of greenish, yellow, sallow hue. "Leucorrhoea in place of the menses," or "copious leucorrhoea between the menstrual periods."
The heart is weak, pulse feeble. Paralytic weakness in the limbs, numbness, jerking of the muscles, twitching, quivering, loss of sensation, loss of power, muscular weakness in all the limbs. Numbness and paralytic feeling in the limbs. Awkwardness of the fingers and hands. On attempting to grasp the one hand with the other there is migratory numbness, or a more permanent numbness associated with paralytic weakness, sometimes changeable; sometimes one side is numb and the other paralyzed. The soles of the feet go to sleep. Numbness of the soles of the feet, such as we have in locomotor ataxia; cold feet. The knees give way from weakness. Totters while walking and threatens to fall to one side. Knees stiff. Paralysis of the lower extremities, proceeding from the small of the back. Arising from cold, from the abuse of Mercury. Paralysis of the lower limbs, with stiffness, numbness and bruised feeling.
Sleeplessness from long nursing and from night watching; that is a symptom that I have called your attention to so often. Anxious, frightful dreams; ill effects from loss of sleep and night watching. "Slightest loss of sleep tells on him."
CONIUM MACULATUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This medicine is a deep, long acting antipsoric, establishing a state of disorder in the economy that is so far reaching and so long lasting that it disturbs almost all the tissues of the body. The complaints are brought on from taking cold, and the glands become affected all over the body. From every little cold the glands become hard and sore. Infiltration in deep-seated diseases in the region of ulcers and in the region of inflamed parts; in the glands along the course of the lymphatics, so we get a chain like knots. The glands under the arm inflame and ulcerate. The glands in the neck, in the groin and abdomen become enlarged. Ulcerated parts indurate. An abscess of the breast becomes surrounded by lumps and nodules. Nodules in the breast even where milk has not yet formed; lumps and nodules, indurations and enlarged glands form under the skin all over the body. Conium has been used extensively for malignant affections of glands, because it takes hold of glands from the beginning and infiltrates, and they gradually grow to a stony hardness; like scirrhus. Now, another grand feature running through this remedy is the action upon the nerves. The nerves are in a state of great debility. Trembling, jerking of the muscles and twitching from the weakness of the nerves. Inability to stand any physical effort without great exhaustion. Gradually growing paralytic weakness, somewhat as was described in Cocculus. Exhaustion of body and mind, that is a general slowing down of all the activities of the body. The liver becomes indurated, sluggish, enlarged. The bladder is weak, can expel only a part of the urine. Or sometimes there is a paralytic condition and no expulsive power. This shows that the remedy increases toward a paralytic weakness.
Hysteria. Hypochondriacal state of mind, with the nervousness, trembling and weakness of the muscles. He gets tired in the earlier stages, but finally this goes on until the limbs are paralytic.
A great many of the complaints are painless. The ulcers and the paralytic conditions are painless. Great physical and mental debility; great prostration of the muscular system; exhaustion, tremulous weakness. Paralysis of the legs and hip. Mental symptoms, nervous symptoms, trembling, in widows and widowers who have suddenly been deprived of their sexual relations. When in a state of considerable vigor, if suddenly deprived, the woman or the man takes on a state of trembling weakness, inability to stand any mental effort, and inability to put the attention upon things said by others. Not so marked or not so common in the woman as in the man. When this state comes on in a woman who is of unusual sexual vigor there may be severe congestion of the uterus and ovaries, Apis is more likely to fit her symptoms than Conium. But with hysteria and excitability Conium is often the remedy. Many of its symptoms come about from such a cause.
Conium has such a deep action that it gradually brings about a state of imbecility. The mind gives out. The mind at first becomes tired like the muscles of the body. Unable to sustain any mental effort. The memory is weak. The mind will not concentrate, it will not force itself to attention; it cannot meditate, and then comes imbecility. Inability to stand any mental effort or to rivet the attention upon anything are some of the most important symptoms in this medicine. Insanity of a periodical type. Imbecility, though, is far more frequent than insanity. When you come to examine the mental states you will see symptoms that will make you think the patient is delirious, but that is not quite it. It is a slow-forming weakness of mind; not that rapid, active state, such as accompanies a fever; it is a delirium without a fever, so to speak, which is not constant. Forms of insanity that are passive. He thinks slowly, and he continues in this stage for weeks and months, if he recovers at all. Those excitable cases that have more or less violence and activity in mental states are such as will correspond to Bell., Hyos., Strain, and Ars. You see nothing of that in this medicine. This state of the mind has come on so gradually that the family has not observed it. The mind is full of strange things that have come little by little, and when the family look over the many things that he has done and said they begin to wonder if he is not becoming insane, but he is traveling toward a state of imbecility. Conium is of a slow, passive character. Complete indifference; takes no interest in anything, particularly when walking in the open air. "He is averse to being near people and to talking of those passing him; is inclined to seize hold of and abuse them." That, of course, is an insane act. "Sad and gloomy. Great unhappiness of mind, recurring every fourteen days," showing a two weeks' periodicity. The Conium patient will sit and mope in the corner in a state of sadness and depression, giving no reason only that he is so sad.
A hypochondriacal subject going around with whims and notions that people attempt to reason him out of, and the more they attempt to reason with him the more sad he is. Morose, peevish, vexed. Everything vexes and disturbs him. Cannot endure any kind of excitement, it brings on physical and mental distress, brings on weakness and sadness. Sometimes Conium symptoms will be found in persons who have suffered from grief; they become broken in memory. This is likely to come first. They forget, never can recall things just as they want them. And so they grow weaker and weaker until they become imbeciles. If it is decidedly mental, imbecility results; if it is taking a physical course the ending is paralysis, and it is not uncommon for a general paralytic weakness to come on, so that body and mind progress toward weakness together until some decided manifestation is made, and then it will be seen to be going toward paralysis, or some decided manifestation is made which will send it toward imbecility, and then the body will seem to remain stationary. There comes a time in these cases where there is a sort of division between the body and the mind. Whenever under homoeopathic treatment the physical improves and the mental grows worse, that patient will never be cured. There are such cases. I never like to see the physical grow better and the mental grow worse in any degree. That does not mean the aggravation caused by the remedy. If the mental does not improve, it means that the patient is growing worse. There is no better evidence of the good action of a remedy than mental improvement.
Conium patients cannot endure even the slightest alcoholic drink. Any wine or stimulating beverage will bring on trembling, excitement, weakness of mind and prostration. There are many headaches in these patients. Patients going into decline will manifest headaches.
Stitching, tearing pains in the head; throbbing in the head. Signs precursory to a giving out of the brain. Neuralgia. Weakness of muscles. Weakness of muscles on one side of the face. Paralysis of the upper lids. Tingling pains. These are only in keeping with the signs of a general breakdown. We would not think of giving Conium for those sudden, violent congestions of the brain, sudden, violent attacks of pain in the head, face or eyes, but those that accompany a general progressive disease. There are stitching, lancinating, knife-like pains along the course of nerves about face and eyes and head. Stitching in the top of the head. Burning on top of the head. Often the symptoms will lead the homoeopathic physician to make a physical examination. A great deal more important than the physical examination are the symptoms that point out a remedy.
Excitement will bring on headaches. Numbness of the scalp is one of the common symptoms of Conium. It is a general; wherever there is trouble there will be numbness, numbness with pains, very often numbness with the weakness. Paralytic conditions are attended with numbness. Sick headache with inability to urinate. Great giddiness. Everything in the room seems to go around. Confused feeling in the head. Often sits lost in thought. Vertigo and pressure in the head with unaltered pulse. Vertigo worse from stooping. The slightest spiritous drink intoxicates him. Vertigo when turning the head, like turning in a circle, when rising from a seat; worse when lying down, as though the bed were turning in a circle; when turning in bed or when looking around. The vertigo most common in Conium is that which comes on while lying in bed rolling the eyes or turning the eyes. This is somewhat as it is in Cocculus, not as to vertigo alone, but the general slowed down condition of the muscles. The paresis, or weakness of the muscles all over the body is also present in the eyes. There is a muscular weakness of all the muscles of the eye, so that the Conium patient is unable to watch moving objects without getting sick-headaches, visual and mental disturbances. Riding on the cars, watching things in rapid motion, and inability to focus rapidly slow-ness of the accommodation is what we must call it is the cause for many sicknesses. Inability to follow moving objects with sufficient rapidity and a headache comes on. "Objects look red, rainbow-colored, striped; confused spots; double vision; weakness of sight. Shortsighted; cannot read long without letters running together." All this is due to defective accommodation. "Sluggish adaptation of the eye to varied range of vision. Vision becomes blurred when he is irritable. Weakness and dazzling of the eyes, together with dizziness. Aversion to light without inflammation of the eyes." The pupil will not accommodate itself to the changes between strong light and dim light, and he suffers from it. Severe photophobia and lachrymation. Photo-phobia without congestion of any tissue without or within the globe of the eye. Sometimes the pupils are contracted and sometimes dilated. Conium has cured ulcer of the cornea. Burning in the eyes when reading." Shooting, smarting, cutting, burning pain in the eyes. The lids indurate, thicken and are heavy and fall. It is with difficulty that he can lift them up. So this paralysis extends all through the muscles of the body and affects the mind similarly. "Could scarcely raise the eyelids, they seemed pressed down by a heavy weight. Burning on entire surface of lids; hordeola; paralysis of muscles of the eyes." A marked condition is that of swelling of the glands about the face, ear and under the jaws. The parotids are swollen and hard. The same gradually increasing hardness in the sub-maxillary and sublingual glands. Enlargement of the glands of the side of the neck in cancerous affections. It has cured epithelioma of the lid, and of the nose and of the cheek. Ulcers about the lip with induration. Deep under the ulcer there will be hardness, and along all the vessels that send lymph towards that ulcer there will be a chain of knots.
Paresis extending to paralysis of the oesophagus; difficulty in swallowing; food goes down part way and stops. As food is about to pass the cardiac orifice it stops and enters with a great effort. "Strange rising in the throat, with sense of stuffing, as if something were lodged there. Sense of fullness in the throat as of a lump, with involuntary attempts at swallowing. Fullness in throat with suppressed eructations. Pressure in oesophagus as if a round body were ascending from stomach." That is a nervous affection found in nervous women and has been called globus hystericus. When a woman feels as if she wanted to cry, and she swallows and chokes, she will have a similar lump in the throat. Nervous, broken-down constitutions ; tired of life; sees nothing in the future but sickness and sorrow and paralysis or imbecility. When they have their lucid moments they weep, become sad over their enlarged glands and weakness, and have a lump in the throat.
There are many stomach troubles; ulceration of the stomach; cancer of the stomach. Conium is one of the greatest palliatives in symptoms of the stomach when all the symptoms agree. It will palliate cancerous conditions for a while, then on comes the difficulty again, because when the symptoms have advanced sufficiently to indicate Conium many times there is no hope of cure.
Hardness of the abdomen, great sensitiveness of the abdomen. Pinching pains, stitching pains, colicky, cutting pains, cramping pains. Bearing down in the abdomen in the woman as if the uterus would escape. Often more common than diarrhoea is constipation with ineffectual urging, hard stool, paralysis of the rectum. Inability to strain at stool, inability to expel contents because of the paralytic weakness of all the muscles that take part in expulsion. Pulsation and emptiness in the abdomen after a normal stool. The woman strains so much at stool that the uterus protrudes from the vagina. After every stool tremulous weakness and palpitation. The urine will stop and start. He strains to expel the urine and gets tired and stops. The stream of urine stops and without any pressure whatever it starts again, and it does that two or three times during urination. Irregular muscular actions while. passing urine. "Intermittent flow of urine, with cutting after micturition. Urine turbid after standing."
Weakness of the sexual powers of the male; impotency. He may have most violent sexual desire yet he is impotent. "Great sexual desire with partial or complete incapacity. Emissions without dreams. Painful emissions and painful ejaculations." There is a catarrhal state of. the seminal vesicles attended with much soreness, so that when ejaculation takes place there is cutting like a knife, as if the semen were acrid. Bad effects from suppressed sexual desire in widowers and those who have been accustomed to coition. "Sexual weakness. Insufficient erection, lasting only a short time ; weakness after embrace. Swelling and induration of testicles." Hardness and swelling of the testicles gradually comes on. "Discharge of prostatic fluid on every change of emotion, without voluptuous thoughts, or while expelling faeces; with itching of the prepuce." Hence we have a strange intermingling of increased irritability of the parts, the neck of the bladder, sexual organs, prostate gland, with weakness, with impotency. In the male, remember, there is induration and enlargement of the testicles; in the woman induration and enlargement of the ovaries and uterus. "Uterine spasms during too early and scanty menses." Soreness in the abdomen in the early stages of gestation, motions of the child are painful. Burning, stinging, tearing pains in the neck of the uterus. Great soreness of the breasts. This medicine has dwindling of the mammary glands as well as enlargement and induration. Suppressed menstruation, painful menstruation, throbbing, tearing, burning pains in the uterus and in the ovaries, in the pelvis. It has cured fibroid tumors of the uterus. It has restrained cancerous growth of the cervix. One of the most distressing growths known to women is a cancerous growth of the cervix. It is the most difficult to check of all the cancerous affections known. It will progress most rapidly, but Conium is one of those remedies that will slow down that inflammation and restrain somewhat the haemorrhages. Conium has produced induration and infiltration of the cervix.
Difficult breathing. Dry cough almost constantly, worse lying in bed. Cough when first lying down. Is obliged to sit up and cough it out. Taking a deep breath causes cough. Such are the striking features of a Conium cough. In the chest, violent stitches. Painful swelling of the breasts. Rending, tearing pains in the chest.
In the back, weakness is a most striking thing, with some dorsal pains. Lancinating pains are spoken of. "Ill effects of bruises and shocks to the spine." After injuries, especially in the lumbar region, pains and filling up of the veins of the lower limbs. Rheumatic pains; paralysis of the lower limbs; ulceration. And the sufferings and conditions are better by letting the limbs hang down. Conium differs from a great many medicines. It is common for pains and aches to be relieved by putting the feet up on a chair; by putting them up in bed. But the patient with the rheumatism, with the ulceration of the legs and the other strange sufferings of the legs, will lie down and permit his legs to hang over the bed up as far as the knee. That is something that somebody ought to undertake to account for, so we could have at least one thing we could prescribe for under pathology. But up to date we have no explanation. Tottering gait in middle-aged men.
Another grand feature of the remedy: he sweats copiously during sleep. Sometimes the patient will say that if he merely closes the eyes he will sweat. It is certainly true on closing the eyes preparatory to going to sleep he will break out in a sweat. Owing to the fact that Conium produces such a marked induration and infiltration of tissues that have been inflamed, stenoses are apt to form where inflammation has been present. Stricture of the urethra and stenosis of the os uteri have been cured by Conium.
CROTALUS HORRIDUS (RATTLESNAKE)
The first impression would be to rebel against the use of such substances as Crotalus, Lachesis, Apis and other animal poisons, and it is true that the lay mind must look with something like horror upon their administration; but when they are properly used and when we consider the dreadfulness of the necessity demanding them, and also when we have ascertained that there can be no substitute when demanded, and again that they are potentized and changed until they are perfectly pure, because reduced to a state of simple substance, the horror passes away from the mind. It is true that the diseases that call for the use of such substances as Crotalus are very grave. When at the bedside of a Crotalus patient one feels that death is very near, the subject is horrible to look upon, and the mother in regard to her child, or the husband, would immediately say, "Doctor, use anything in order to save the life; resort to anything in order to heal this sick one."
The symptoms are peculiar in Crotalus. The remedy stands out by itself. There can be no substitute for it, as there is no other remedy, taken as a whole, that looks like it. The other snake poisons form the nearest resemblance, but this one is the most dreadful of all, excepting, perhaps, the Ancistrodon contortrix (Copperhead). In the case of snake bites we get the most dire effects; we see death itself, we see the ending after a very rapid course, the very highest type Of zymosis. These snake poisons are supposed to be cyan-hydrates of soda and other salts. It is known that alcohol is the natural solvent of the cyanhydrates, and because of this alcohol has been used in great quantities in snake bites, and it has frequently prolonged and even saved life. If he lives through the violent attack he goes on forever manifesting the chronic effects, and from these we have collected symptoms. Dogs that have been bitten manifested the chronic effects of rattlesnake bite, and in them a peculiar periodicity has been manifested, viz., every spring as the cold weather subsides and the warm days begin. I once had the privilege of tracing up a dog that had been bitten by the Cenchris and had survived. It was bitten in the region of the neck, and in that region a large abscess formed every spring as long as that dog lived, until old age, when he died from that disease. The periodicity in the snake poisons is related to the spring, to the coming on of the warm weather.
Another marked general feature in Crolatus, as in most of the other Ophidians, is that the patient sleeps into the aggravation.
The poison of the Crolatus horridus, in its earliest manifestations, is like unto the zymotic changes that we find in scarlet fever, in diphtheria, in typhoid and low forms of blood poisoning, those cases that come on with great rapidity, breaking down of the blood, relaxation of the blood vessels, bleeding from all of the orifices of the body, rapidly increasing unconsciousness like one intoxicated and besotted in appearance. A mental and physical prostration that is almost paralytic in character. Scarlet fever when it becomes putrid; typhoid when it becomes putrid, diphtheria with much bleeding and putridity. The body appears mottled, blue intermingled with yellow. Jaundice comes on with astonishing quickness, and the eyes become yellow, and the skin becomes yellow and mottled. Blue in spots. Black and blue spots as if bruised, intermingled with yellow. After haemorrhages the skin becomes extremely anaemic. It is yellow, pale, bloodless. The body looks like wax. Haemorrhage from the ears, eyes, nose, lungs, from the mucous membranes everywhere from the bowels, from the uterus. A haemorrhagic constitution. Crolatus is indicated in disease of the very lowest, the most putrid type, coming on with unusual rapidity, reaching that putrid state in an unusually short time. One who has been poisoned rapidly sinks into this besotted, benumbed, putrid, semi-conscious state. There is a feeling as if death were coming over him. As the blood oozes out it becomes black. It is sometimes fluid.
An awful state of nervousness prevails. Trembling of the limbs, tremulous weakness. On protruding the tongue it comes out quivering. Tired by the slightest exertion. Sudden prostration of the vital powers. A paralytic weakness prevails throughout. Twitching of the muscles, trembling of the limbs. Sliding down in bed occurs in the typhoid conditions where this remedy has proved of benefit, the forms of yellow fever with great prostration. This species of yellow fever has been cured by this remedy. Convulsions and paralysis. It has twitching of muscles something like chorea, trembling, localized spasms, hysterical manifestations.
The mental symptoms are well worth examining. The low form of delirium, muttering, talking to himself is a peculiar form of loquacity. It differs somewhat from Lachesis. Both have loquacity. The Lach. loquacity is so rapid that if anyone in the room commences to tell something the patient will take it up and finish the story, although he has never heard anything about it, so active is his mind. No one is permitted to finish a story in the presence of a Lach. patient. One will commence to tell something. He will say, "Oh, yes; I understand it," and he will go off on another line and finish up with something entirely different. Crotalus does that, too, but Crotalus will take it up and mumble and stumble over his words in a clumsy manner. It is a low passive state like intoxication; in Lach. it is wild excitement. "Delirium with languor, drowsiness, stupor." That tells it. "Loquacious delirium with desire to escape from bed." It is passive, however. His motions are slow. "Muttering delirium of typhus. Sadness." His thoughts dwell on death continually. "Excessive sensitiveness. Moved to tears by reading. Melancholy with timidity, fear. Anxious and pale, with cold sweat. Irritable, cross, infuriated by least annoyance." On motion there is vertigo, dizziness: On keeping still there is pain. On; going to sleep there is pain, and he is roused by violent pain. The longer he sleeps the more severe that pain in the, head.
He sleeps into his symptoms. All the snake poisons more or less sleep, into troubles. The head troubles come on after sleep. He sleeps into headache. The longer he sleeps, the harder are the headaches.
The headache is so hard in the back of the head that it is almost impossible to raise it from the pillow. The muscles become so tired he has to take hold of it with his hands. This belongs also to Lach. A congestive headache with waxy face, yellow, purple, mottled face, as if there had been bruises. "Headache extending into the eyes. Bilious headache every few days." Severe sick headache, together with dizziness; throbbing in the top of the head. Dull, pulsating headaches. "Dull, heavy, throbbing, occipital headaches, or the whole head is in a state of congestion. He is confused and dazed. Head feels too large. Head feels full, feels as if it would burst. Headaches that come on in waves as if they came up the back, a surging of blood upwards, an orgasm described as if the blood rushed upwards. Headache with surging in waves and excited by motion or jar, by turning over in bed, by rising up in bed, or by lying down. Change of position will cause this surging. In Lach. it is described, and I have seen it verified, as beginning away down in the spine and surging upward coincident with the pulse.
Haemorrhage from the eyes. Yellow appearance of the eyes. "Blood exudes from the eye, burning in eyes; redness with lachrymation." Pressure in the eyes as if the eyes would be pushed out from the head. Paralysis of the upper lids. Inflammation of the mucous membrane of the lids.
Surging in the ears. "Sensitive to noises." Dull aching and throbbing in the ears. Fetid, copious, yellow, offensive, bloody discharges from the ears. Blood oozing from the ears in drops in zymotic diseases, low forms of scarlet fever, or of diphtheria where there is oozing from the eyes and ears, and copious bleeding from the nose. The nose is the most common organ to bleed in zymotic diseases. The rush of blood seems to get relief from bleeding from the nose. In this medicine the congestion to the head is violent with bleeding from the nose. It has cured all forms of foetid catarrh where there was much blood oozing along with the foetid discharge. Horrible, foetid, putrid discharges from the nose. Ozana.
Inflammation of the parotid gland. Blueness and discoloration of the face. Yellow appearance of the face, a marked condition of jaundice. In girls who appear waxy or anaemic, yellowish green, have for a long time missed the menstrual period and break out in pustules and pimples.
This patient often wakes up during the night grinding the teeth. The taste is bad, putrid. Inflammation of the gums. Bleeding from the mouth. Inflammation of the throat with bleeding of the throat. Burning in the throat and mouth. Trembling, quivering and swollen tongue. Trembling of the tongue when it is put out. Trembling of the hands when they are moved. Those cases of diphtheria that ooze blood from the nose and mouth are very low types, and are sure to die without a well-selected remedy. The throat will be filled up under such circumstances with a diphtheritic membrane that looks dark. There is bleeding all around it. Sore mouth with bleeding. Ulcers in the mouth. Ulcers after Merc. in those who are pouring forth saliva on the pillow at night. Bleeding ulcers in the mouth. Difficult swallowing. Malignant diphtheria. Cannot lie on the right side or back without instantly producing black, bilious vomiting. This is a wonderfully bilious remedy, sick headaches, vomiting of bile in great quantities. The various low forms of disease calling for Crotalus often begin with vomiting great quantities of bile, sometimes bile mixed with blood.
Pain in the stomach, coldness as if a piece of ice were in the stomach or in the abdomen. Stomach irritable, unable to retain anything, constantly throws up blood. Crotalus has cured ulceration of the stomach. It has greatly restrained the growth of carcinoma when there is much vomiting of bile and blood. Vomiting in many instances where the blood has no tendency to coagulate. Now, with all these ulcerations of the stomach, cancerous affections, low zymotic disease, jaundice is nearly always present; jaundice and more or less of bleeding; fever seldom runs high; sometimes the temperature is subnormal, but with oozings and bleedings, with dark haemorrhage from the nose and mouth and dark, scanty, bloody urine containing albumen. The abdomen is greatly distended like the tympanitic abdomen of typhoid and the low zymotic diseases. Ulceration of the bowels, haemorrhage from the bowels. Much pain and soreness in the abdomen with numbness. Feeling in it as if it were made of wood. "Stool black, thin like coffee grounds. Dysentery of septic origin from foul water, food, etc. Diarrhoea from noxious effluvia." Inflammation of the ovaries and of the uterus. Low form of putrid fever. Haemorrhages. Either dark clots or blood that has no tendency to coagulate and keeps on flowing. There is great trouble at the climacteric period. Hot flashes. Jaundice. Hemorrhage from the uterus or from other parts. Cancer of the uterus with much bleeding. Great offensiveness. Patient becomes yellow, jaundiced, great exhaustion, mottled appearance of the skin, swelling of the face, of the leg, especially along the course of the veins. Phlegmasia alba dolens. Worse from the slightest touch. Worse from jar, from motion.
There is some reason to think that this will be more or less a heart remedy from the great cardiac weakness it produces. But the other snake poisons like Naja, Loch. and Elaps have had more clinical application than this one. This one seems to prostrate the heart, but also to prostrate the .whole body, and its complaints are more general. Mottled appearance of the limbs. Gangrenous appearance of the extremities.
Boils, carbuncles and eruptions are surrounded by a purplish condition of the skin, a mottled, blue, splotched or marbled state. It produces boils, abscesses and a condition somewhat resembling a carbuncle, with burning and violent pains, but the peculiar feature is the doughy center. Around the boil or carbuncle for many inches there is oedema, with pitting upon pressure. The boil, or abscess, or carbuncle will bleed a thick, black blood that will not coagulate. Carbuncles that come upon the neck and upon the back begin with a pustule, and then several come and they are surrounded by little pustules and papules and there is pitting upon pressure. For these carbuncles you will need to study particularly Arsenicum, Anthracinum, Lachesis, Secale and Crotalus. They are the medicines that have in their nature malignancy and manifestation.
In puerperal fever there is a continued oozing of black offensive blood that will not coagulate; bleeding from every orifice of the body as well as from the uterus. Imagine a woman who is pregnant suffering from typhoid fever. She aborts and a low zymotic state comes on with the symptoms that I have described and with all the appearance as if she would bleed to death after the abortion. The blood will not coagulate and the flow continues. Or in a woman during a typhoid fever menstruation comes on. It is not a true menstrual flow, that is, it does not resemble the ordinary flow, because it is copious, dark and liquid, a continuous oozing with all the grave symptoms described, and especially the besotted countenance, the comatose state, the appearance as if she were intoxicated, lying as one dead. When aroused every muscle trembles; if the tongue is protruded it trembles, and there is inability to articulate. Crotalus may save her life. Would it be possible to think of graver states of sickness than such as are produced by the ophidia? When a physician sees these symptoms coming on he immediately thinks of a class of remedies that can cover such a state, remedies like Baptisia, Arsenicum, Secale and the Ophidia, and sometimes Arnica, Phosphorus and Pyrogen.
In the more chronic conditions the individual manifests a terrible state as to his sleep. He rises from sleep as in a fright; has horrible dreams of murder, of death, of dead bodies and dead people, of associating with the dead and with corpses, of being in graveyards; even the smell of the cadaver is dreamed of. While he is awake he is tired, he is stupid, he cannot add figures, he makes mistakes in writing, he transposes sentences, and in words he transposes letters. He is unable to take care of his own accounts, for he cannot add up things that are at all particular. Sleep alternates with long and tedious periods of wakefulness. He is disturbed by any change to warm weather. Great irritability, sensitive to spheres, easily disturbed - by his surroundings, and easily wrought up into a pitch of excitement are also features of this remedy. Following this up he is suspicious o his friends and is unable to reason upon a rational basis. He craves intoxicating drinks and is unable to resist the craving. This wonderful resemblance to old inebriates has led to the use of Crotalus in delirium tremens; it has the besotted countenance, the purple aspect of the face, the peculiar kind of hunger in the drunkard, the craving by spells for stimulants. There is every reason to believe that in fat, robust, besotted drunkards it may, if properly used, be a remedy deep enough to remove the appetite for strong drink.
CROTON TIGLIUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Croton oil, when applied to the skin, produces both vesicles and pustules upon an inflamed base, and the part becomes very red and sore. The inflammation often increases until it resembles erysipelas, but more commonly the eruption produced resembles a vesicular eczema. This eruption will come on for a few days and will then desiccate, and in a few days longer it will desquamate.
When one has been overdosed, as is done in a too prolonged proving, or by the crude drug, or when the prover has been markedly sensitive, we get an alternation of states, the internal alternating with the external. After the eruption is out the internal manifestations are not present, as is seen in the rheumatic state, the cough and the bowel symptoms. If we study these groups separately we will find they are all interesting.
First, its cough. It has an asthmatic cough, coming on in the middle of the night, often arousing the patient from a sound sleep. Attacks of violent coughing, with dyspnoea and choking, worse at night and worse on lying down, compelling him to sit up, to be bolstered up in bed, or to sit up in a reclining chair. His friends wonder if he is not going into consumption. If it is a child they wonder whether it is not whooping cough. There is extreme irritation of the air passages, so that the inhalation of air brings on the cough. Sensitive to deep breathing. Now, this will go on for a while and finally he will break out with an eruption somewhere upon the body, vesicles and pustules, in clusters and patches, that become inflamed and red and finally dry up and desquamate and disappear, and then back comes his cough. This may go on as a chronic state, and when such is the case it will be very well to know this remedy.
The next most important symptoms are the bowel symptoms, and perhaps they are the best known of any of its symptoms outside of the eruption. It is suitable in both acute and chronic diarrhoea. It is suitable in cholera infantum. The marked feature is the extreme suddenness with which the stool is ejected. It seems to come out in one gush of yellow, watery or pappy stool; soft, thin faeces, coming out with one gush. So marked is this that it is not an uncommon thing for a rural patient to describe it as "like that of a goose." It all gushes out in one squirt. The mother says of the little patient: "You would be astonished, doctor, at the violent rush, for it all comes out with one squirt." That is descriptive. Many remedies have a holding on and a prolonged effort at stool, until it takes quite a long time. Many of the diarrhoeas are prolonged with numerous little gushes of thin faeces or water, but this particular feature is striking. It may not always be so, but this violent gush of thin, yellow faeces or yellow water is a striking feature of the remedy. With this the abdomen is very sensitive, and is greatly distended; there is much gurgling in the bowel, and when the physician puts his hand upon it the patient will say he feels the gurgling, as if he were full of water, and it probably is so, for the expulsion of the stool would not occur in one strong gush were it not for the fact that the colon and rectum were full of fluid. Another peculiar thing commonly attending Croton tig. diarrhoeas is that pressure over the abdomen or pressure about the umbilicus causes a pain in the rectum and urging to stool, and a feeling, with the expulsion of the stool, as if the rectum would protrude. Clinically it has been described as if the pain followed the intestines all the way down to the anus. The taking of a little water, or of a little milk, what would ordinarily be suitable food for such a diarrhoea, will at times cause an instant urging to stool; he must go to stool immediately after eating. This gives the general features of the Croton tig. diarrhoea. If it is in an infant there is great exhaustion, tympanitic abdomen, much rumbling of the bowels, great sinking, and as soon as the infant takes one mouthful of milk or draws from the mother's breast it expels a gush of liquid or pappy stool.
Another most important group of symptoms is its eye symptoms. It has eye symptoms of an inflammatory character, and around the eyes and upon the lids are vesicles and pustules. Pustules upon the cornea, granular lids. Inflammation of all the tissues of the eye. It has an inflammation of the iris and conjunctiva. The blood vessels of the eyes are distended, the eye looks red and raw. The eyelids when turned out are seen to be greatly inflamed and granular, covered with vesicles and pustules. With this inflammatory condition there is a sensation very commonly present in the Croton tig. eye cases, as if the eye were drawn backwards by a string, or as if the optic nerve were dragging the eyes backwards into the head. This drawing in the back of the eye as with a string is also peculiar to Paris quadrifolia, but the conditions are different in Paris quad. In headaches -from overuse of the eyes in engravers or those doing fine needle work, with much neuralgia in the head, due probably to the overuse of the eyes, when the pains in the eyes are not attended with inflammation, but are more of the type of dull aches and pains that you might call only rheumatic or neuralgic, with this sensation as if the eyes were drawn back into the brain; in these neuralgic cases use Paris quad. But in the inflammatory conditions such as I have described, with the same drawing back as with a string, Croton tig. is the remedy.
Troublesome eczema of the scalp in infants, either purely vesicular or intermingled more or less with pustules. The vesicles dry up and then desquamate, and now there is a red, raw, inflamed surface, sensitive to touch. After desquamation has pretty nearly finished, a new crop of pustules and vesicles comes out, and while one place is clearing off another is vesicular. This is how it goes on with a chronic eczema. The eruptions are often about the eyes, on the temples, over the face and on top of the head. The appearance is so nearly like Sepia that the two very often cannot be distinguished. Sepia has the same vesiculation intermingled with pustules, the bleeding and rawness of the surface and the eruption of new crops. Sepia is more frequently indicated in this raw and bleeding state of the scalp, in crusta lactea, or the eruption of children than Crot. tig. Under Croton tig. infants in this state very often have attacks of gushing diarrhoea, coming on from the slightest disturbance or indigestion; this is a great help in guiding to the remedy. When the two groups of symptoms are combined, the scalp symptoms and the diarrhoea, you can hardly make a mistake. You will see this also, that if the diarrhoea is at all prolonged, the head will steadily improve and you will think your patient is getting well of the scalp trouble, but when the diarrhoea slackens up a little out will come a fresh crop. If the diarrhoea becomes chronic the external eruption will disappear, and if the diarrhoea improves the external eruption gets worse. It seems necessary in such a constitution to have a vent. The mucous membrane is but the internal skin, and the integument of the body the external skin, and this remedy especially manifests itself upon one or the other of these, the mucous membrane or the integument.
It has another manifestation that you want to carry in mind, a group of symptoms in relation to lactation. After confinement the mother may go on a little while with all things following normally, but all at once she commences to have pains in one or the other mammary gland, and the drawing as with a string comes up again. It feels to her as if a string were attached behind the nipple pulling backward, a sharp, drawing, stinging pain that will in some instances keep her walking the floor night and day. Though it is but a little thing it is a very important symptom to know with Crot. tig. We see this drawing, as with a string, in the eye and in the breast, and also the symptom, very like the Plumbum symptom, drawing in the navel upon pressure, somewhat like a string. Associating such things together will enable you to understand them as a part of the nature of the remedy and to keep them in mind. I once cured a woman of this painful drawing from the nipple as with a string. I watched her walk the floor and saw that the suffering must be very intense, for at times it brought tears to her eyes. She had borne it several nights, which shows that Croton tig. is capable of curing a pain that is very prolonged or tedious. The breast had been poulticed, hot applications had been put upon it, and they did not give relief, a point which is worth remembering.
In cholera infantum we will naturally have the symptoms of vomiting, which, however, are not so common to Croton tig., although it has some vomiting. So in cases of cholera infantum, in which the vomiting is not so important a feature as the loose bowels, the remedy may be Crot. tig. A symptom is reported that is of great value. Excessive nausea with vanishing of sight, vertigo, worse after drinking, with frequent discharges of yellowish-green water from the bowels; excessive nausea, much water in the mouth. So we note the excessive nausea and not so great vomiting. The nausea is more like that of Ipecac., but in Ipecac. we have nothing like the stools of Crot. tig., we have only scanty little gushes, every minute a little gush with tenesmus. Vomiting is the all important symptom in the cholera infantum of Ipecac., and when the stomach is emptied there is overwhelming retching and exhaustion from it, and the stools are scanty; but in Croton tig. the stools are copious, and while there is nausea the vomiting is seldom and scanty.
Another feature to be considered in this remedy is its relation to Rhus. It is an antidote to Rhus. Croton tig. is closely related in its vesicular eruption to the Rhus family (particularly Rhus tox.). Anacardium, Sepia and Anagallis. The eruptions of Croton tig. very often select as a location the genital organs. Rhus does the same, and when the genital organs are the principal seat of the eruptions in Rhus poisoning Croton tig. will commonly be its antidote; also when the eruptions are most about the eyes and scalp Croton tig. will often furnish an antidote. When the symptoms, however, confine themselves to the palms of the hands Croton tig. is not the remedy, but it is Anagallis. Anagallis does upon the palms of the hands just what
Croton tig. does upon the genitals. If you examine Anagallis you will find that the eruptions will come out and desquamate, and no. sooner does the surface look as if it would heal than a new crop comes out. Rhus is similar in that it locates upon the palms of the hands, but Rhus does not repeat itself upon inflamed surfaces. In the Croton tig. eruption there is some burning, but nothing like that of Rhus. The Rhus burning pain in eruptions that are marked is almost like fire. It is worse from the air, and it is better from dipping the part in water as hot as it is possible to endure it. Persons who have these Rhus eruptions talk about scalding their hands to relieve the itching and burning. So it is with Croton fig., but it is usually so sore he cannot touch it; when the eruption is so mild that he can handle it, we find that the slightest rubbing relieves the itching. In Rhus touch aggravates the itching. In bad cases of Rhus poisoning he will hold his fingers far apart if they have very large blisters upon them, and he will not touch the place because it establishes a voluptuous itching that nearly drives him wild. Although this is not so with Croton tig., still they are similar enough to each other to be antidotal ; they do not have to be exactly alike, but they need to be similar. It is true that remedies that are relieved by scratching are more nearly antidotal to such remedies as are relieved by scratching. The more similar the better ; but medicines will antidote each other when they are similar only in general character, and they will cure disease when they are similar in general character. It is also true that medicines while they are not similar in general character may be similar enough in special localities to remove the symptoms in these localities, while the disease will go on. The remedy in this case is not similar enough to cure the disease, but it has removed some of the symptoms. That is the most miserable kind of a prescription, as it changes the manifestations of the disease without changing its nature. In that way a very poor prescriber may hunt around and get one remedy for one group of symptoms and another remedy for another group, and the patient be worse off than before. If the remedies are similar as to their general nature, then the little superficial symptoms are not so extremely important.
"Frequent, corrosive itching on glans and scrotum." "Vesicular eruption on scrotum and penis." It is a remedy for vesicular and pustular eruptions upon the genital organs. It is closely related to Petroleum, which has fine red vesicular and granular elevations, intermingled with fine red rash upon the genitals, itching intensely, worse at times by scratching until burning comes on and then bleeding which relieves.

CUPRUM METALLICUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Cuprum is pre-eminently a convulsive medicine. The convulsive tendency associates itself with almost every complaint that Cuprum creates and cures. It has convulsions in every degree of violence, from the mere twitching of little muscles and of single muscles to convulsions of all the muscles of the body. When these are coming on the earliest threatenings are drawings in the fingers, clenching of the thumbs or twitching of the muscles. It has twitching, quivering, trembling, and it has also tonic contractions, so that the hands are closed violently. In this condition the thumbs are first affected; they are drawn into the palms and then the fingers close down over them with great violence. In the fingers and toes and in the extremities the spasmodic condition increases and extends until the limbs are in a state of great exhaustion. Tonic contractions, the limbs being drawn up with great violence and it seems as if the frame would be torn to pieces by the violent contractions of the muscles everywhere. Often the contractions assume a clonic form, with jerking and twitching.
Cuprum has many mental symptoms. It has a great variety in its delirium, incoherent prattling, talking of all sorts of subjects incoherently. It has produced a variety of mental symptoms: delirium, incoherency of speech, loss of memory. During its different complaints, such as cholera, some forms of fever, the puerperal state, dysmenorrhoea, congestion of the brain, etc., there is delirium, unconsciousness and jerking and twitching of the muscles. The eyes roll in various directions, but commonly upwards and outwards or upwards and inwards. There is bleeding from the nose and the vision is disturbed. Between the convulsive attacks there is incoherent talk, delirium, during which the patient is spiteful, violent, weeping or shrieking. They go into convulsions with a shriek. In one place it is spoken of as bellowing like a calf.
This drug has the ability to produce a group of spasms followed by the appearances as if the patient were dead, or in a state of ecstasy. Convulsive conditions sometimes terminate in a state of stasis during which the mind ceases to act and the muscles remain quiet or only quiver. This is often one of .the leading features in whooping-cough when Cuprum is indicated. To bring it down to the language of the mother, the description which she gives of the little one, which will probably make you remember it better than if I use the text, she says that when the child is seized with a spell of this violent whooping-cough, the face, becomes livid or blue, the finger nails become discolored, the eyes are turned up, the child coughs until it loses its breath, and then lies in a state of insensibility for a long time until she fears the child will never breathe again, but with violent spasmodic action in its breathing, the child from shortest breaths comes to itself again just as if brought back to life. You have here all the violent features of a convulsive whooping-cough. In addition to what the mother says you may also observe a few things, but the whole makeup of such a case, its whole nature, shows that it is a Cuprum whooping-cough. If the mother can get there quickly enough with a little cold water she will stop the cough. Cold water especially will relieve the spasm, and so the mother soon gets into the habit of hurrying for a glass of cold water, and the child also knows, if it has tried it once, that a glass of cold water will relieve it. Whenever the respiratory organs are affected there is spasmodic breathing, dyspnoea. There is also rattling in the chest. The more dyspnoea there is the more likely his thumbs will be clenched and the fingers cramped.
In the lower part of the chest, in the region of the xiphoid appendix, there is a spasmodic condition that is very troublesome. It seems to be at times a constriction so severe that he thinks he will die, and at others a feeling as if he were transfixed with a knife from the xiphoid appendix to the back. Some say it feels as if a lump were in that region and others as if much wind were collected in the stomach. It destroys the fullness of the voice, and it seems as if his life would be squeezed out. Sometimes then it takes the form of colic and sometimes of neuralgia. If you examine the sensation of tightness in the region of the stomach you will see at once how the voice is affected. You will find the patient sitting up in bed; he tells you in a cracked and squeaking voice that he will soon die if he is not relieved; his face is a picture of fear and anguish; he really looks as if he were going to die; the sensation is dreadful. Cuprum speedily cures this complaint. This constriction and dyspnoea occur sometimes in cholera morbus and in painful menstruation. Spasms of the chest are also accompanied by this constriction and a nervous spasmodic breathing. He is not able to take a full breath.
The Cuprum patient is full of cramps. There are cramps in the limbs and in the muscles of the chest, with, trembling and weakness. In old age, and in premature old age, it is useful for those cramps that come in the calves, the soles of the feet, and the toes and fingers at night in bed. In debilitated, nervous, tremulous old people, Cuprum serves a peculiar purpose. When an old man, who has been single a long time, marries, his cramps will sometimes prevent him performing the act of coition. He has cramps in the calves and soles as soon as he begins the act. It is especially suitable to young men who have become prematurely old from vices, from strong drink, from late nights and various abuses, and these cramps are not unlikely to occur in such subjects. Cuprum and Graphites are the two remedies for cramps coming under these circumstances, but whereas Cuprum is said to produce cramps that prevent the act, Graphites is said to bring on the cramps during the act. The two remedies however compete closely with each other, and hence if Graphites corresponds to the constitution of the patient, it should be given, and the same in regard to Cuprum. Sulphur also has cured this state.
In spasmodic conditions that come on during menstruation Cuprum is also useful. Painful menstruation with spasms commencing in the fingers and extending over the body. Tonic contractions that look like hysterical manifestations. They may be hysterical, but that does not interfere with Cuprum curing, if they are only spasmodic or convulsive. Violent dysmenorrhoea with delirium, turning up of the eyes, contortions of the face and epileptiform manifestations.
In epilepsy calling for Cuprum we have the contractions and jerkings of the fingers and toes. He falls with a shriek and during the attack passes urine and faeces. It is indicated in epilepsy that begins with a violent constriction in the lower part of the chest as I have described, or with the contractions in the fingers that spread all over the body, to all the muscles.
Again, it is a remedy sometimes needed in the puerperal state before or after delivery. The case may be of uraemic character, but no matter; the urine is scanty and albuminous. During the progress of the labor the patient suddenly becomes blind. All light seems to her to disappear from the room, the labor pains cease, and convulsions come on, commencing in the fingers and toes. When you meet these cases do not forget Cuprum. You will look a long time before you can cure a case of this kind without Cuprum.
In cholera morbus with gushing, watery stools and copious vomiting, the stomach and bowels are emptied of their contents. The patient is fairly emptied out, becomes blue all over, the extremities are cold, there is jerking of the muscles, cramping of the extremities and of the fingers and toes, spasms of the chest; he is cold, mottled, blue in blotches, going into collapse; the finger nails and toe nails and the hands and feet are blue. There are several remedies that look like Cuprum in such a condition. In cholera we would naturally hunt for such remedies as produce cholera-like discharges, more or less spasmodic conditions, the great blueness, coldness, sinking and collapse. We would here refer to Hahnemann's observation. Hahnemann had not seen a case of cholera, but he perceived that the disease produced appearances resembling the symptoms of Cuprum, Camphor and Veratrum. He saw from the description of the disease that the general aspect of cholera was like the general aspect of Cuprum, Camphor and Veratrum, and these three remedies are the typical cholera remedies. They all have the general features of cholera, its nature and general aspect. They all have the exhaustive vomiting and diarrhoea, the coldness, the tendency to collapse, the sinking from the emptying out of the fluids of the body.
From what I have said you will see that the Cuprum case is, above all others, the spasmodic case. It has the most intense spasms, and the spasms being the leading feature, they overshadow all the other symptoms of the case. He is full of cramps and is compelled to cry out with the pain from the contractions of the muscles. Camphor is the coldest of all the three remedies; the Camphor patient is cold as death. Camphor has the blueness, the exhaustive discharge, though less than Cuprum and Veratrum; but whereas in the two latter remedies the patient is willing to be covered up, in Camphor he wants the windows open and wants to be cool. Though he is cold he wants to be uncovered and to have the windows open. But just here let me mention another feature in Camphor. It has also some convulsions which are painful, and when the pain is on he wants to be covered up and wants the windows shut. If there are cramps in the bowels with the pain, he wants to be covered up. So that in Camphor, during all of its complaints in febrile conditions (and fever is very rare in Camphor), and during the pains he wants to be covered up and warm, but during the coldness he wants to be uncovered and have the air. In cholera, then, the extreme coldness and blueness point to Camphor. Again, with Camphor there are often scanty as well as copious discharges, so that the cholera patient is often taken so suddenly that he has the coldness, blueness and exhaustion and almost no vomiting or diarrhoea, a condition called dry cholera. It simply means an uncommonly small amount of vomiting and diarrhoea. This is Camphor.
Another prominent feature is the great coldness of the body without the usual sweat that belongs to the disease. Cuprum and Veratrum have the cold clammy sweat, and Camphor also has sweat, but more commonly the patient needing Camphor is very cold, blue and dry and wants to be uncovered. That is striking. Now we go to Veratrum and see that we can have three remedies very much alike, and so perfectly adapted to cholera and yet so different. Veratrum is peculiar because of its copious exhaustive discharges, copious sweat, copious discharges from the bowels, copious vomiting, and great coldness of the sweat. There is some cramping and he wants to be warm; he is ameliorated by hot drinks, and by the application of hot bottles which relieve the pain and suffering.
These three, remedies tend downward into collapse and death. Now to repeat: Cuprum for the cases of a convulsive character, Camphor in cases characterized by extreme coldness and more or less dryness, and Veratrum when the copious sweat, vomiting and purging are the features. That is little to remember, but with that you can enter an epidemic of cholera with confidence.
In cholera-like states there are other remedies which relate to Cuprum and which ought to be considered. Podophyllum has cramps, mainly in the bowels. It has a painless, gushing diarrhoea with vomiting as well, and hence is useful in cholera morbus.
The cramps in Podophyllum are violent, they feel to him as if the intestines were being tied in knots. The watery stool is yellow, and, if examined a little while after, it looks as if corn meal had been stirred into it. The odor is dreadful, smelling only like a Podophyllum stool. If you say it smells like stinking meat that only partly describes it; it is not quite cadaveric but it is horribly offensive and penetrating. The stool is gushing, copious, and is accompanied by dreadful exhaustion. "It is a wonder where it can all come from," says the mother, speaking of the exhausting diarrhoea in an infant or in a child. The stool runs away gushingly, in prolonged squirts, with a sensation of emptiness, sinking, deathly goneness in the whole abdomen. Phosphorus also ought to be thought of in relation to Cuprum. It also has cramps in the bowels, exhaustive diarrhoea, sinking as if dying, but commonly with heat of the skin, with burning internally, with gurgling of all the fluids taken into the stomach; as soon as they come to the stomach they commence to gurgle, and gurgle all the way through the bowel. A drink of water seems to flow through the bowel with a gurgle. Now this gurgling in Cuprum commences at the throat; he swallows with a gurgle; gurgling in the oesophagus when swallowing.
Convulsive cramps all over the body with twitching, jerking, trembling and blueness of the skin. Everything he does, all his actions are spasmodic, are convulsive. All the sphincters are convulsive. All the activities are irregular, disorderly and convulsive when poisoned with copper. Bear these things in mind- as we study every region in Cuprum. Repression or driving in of eruptions, attended with diarrhoea and convulsions, sometimes only convulsions. We note a case of measles or scarlet fever with a rash that has been suppressed by a chill -or exposure to wind and convulsions have come on. That belongs to Zincum and Cuprum, sometimes to Bryonia, but to Zincum and Cuprum particularly. Twitching of the limbs from a sudden suppression of a scarlet fever, with suppression of urine, chorea, etc. Cramping of the muscles of the chest; cramping of the calves; cramping all over. Suppressed eruptions. Discharges that have been in existence quite a long time. The individual has become debilitated and worn out with excitement, but this discharge barely kept him alive. He has gradually grown weaker, but he has kept about because he had a discharge. It has furnished him a safety-valve. If stopped suddenly convulsions will come on. That is like Cuprum. A woman has suffered a long time with a copious leucorrhoea and some unwise doctor tells her she must take injections and she checks it up for a few days, hysterical convulsions, crampings and tearings of the muscles come on; contractions of the fingers and toes. Discharges from old ulcers, fistulae suppressed.
Cuprum will re-establish a discharge that has been suddenly suppressed and convulsions followed. It stops the convulsions and reestablishes the discharge. It has caries, it has senile gangrene, or the gangrene that belongs to old age; old shriveled up octogenarians, whose toes and fingers get dark in spots; feeble circulation.
In the Cuprum patient the nerves are all the time wrought up to the highest tension; wants to fly, wants to do something dreadful. Impulsiveness. Compelled to do something; restless and tossing about a constant uneasiness; nervous trembling; always tired. Great weakness of the muscles, and relaxation of the body when the convulsions are not on. Twitching and jerking and starting during sleep. Grinding of the teeth with brain affections. Inflammations cease suddenly and you wonder what has happened. All at once comes on insanity, delirium, convulsions, blindness; evidence of cerebral congestion and inflammation appearing with wonderful suddenness. Metastasis. A perfect change from one part of the body to another. That same thing may occur from a suppressed eruption, or suppressed discharge, or a suppressed diarrhoea, and it goes to the brain, affects the mind and brings on insanity; a wild, active, maniacal delirium. Cuprum is not passive in its business. Violence is manifested everywhere. Violence in its diarrhoea, violence in its vomiting, violence in its spasmodic action; strange and violent things in its mania and delirium. Hysterical cramps and hysterical attitudes may change in a night or in a day to St. Vitus' dance, and go on with it as if nothing had happened. Such is the suddenness with which it changes its character. This is not generally known of Cuprum this constant changing about. Spasmodic affections in general. Spasmodic cough, spasms all over the body. The face becomes purple. He loses his breath; suffocates. The mother thinks the child will never come to life again. Spasms of the chest; spasms of the larynx; spasms of the whole respiratory system of such a character that the child seems to be choking to death.
Whooping cough. With every spell of whooping cough comes this awful spasmodic state, this spasmodic coughing. Jerking of the muscles. Cuprum has spasms of the limbs with all sorts of contractions such as are found in hysterical constitutions. Puerperal convulsions. Convulsions where a limb will first flex and then extend an alternation of flexion and extension. In a child you will see the leg all at once shoot out with great violence, then up against the abdomen again with great violence, and then again shoot out. It is hard work to find another remedy that has that. Tabacum has it, but not many others. Convulsions with flexion and extension are common to Cuprum. Convulsions of the limbs, twitching and jerking of the muscles. We get a part of the symptom-picture in one and part in another.
Violent congestion in the head, violent pains in the head. Tingling pain in the vertex, severe pain in the vertex, bruised pain. Crawling sensation in vertex, stitches in the temples. Congestion of the brain. Meningitis. Headache after epileptic attacks. Paralysis of the brain with symptoms of collapse. Metastasis to the brain from other organs.
About the face; convulsions, jerking of the eyes; twitching of the lids. Bruised pain in the eyes. Spasms of the muscles of the eye so that the eyes jerk and twitch, first from one side and then the other. Rolling of the eyes. "Quick rotation of the balls with the lids closed. Lids spasmodically closed." Closed so that they seem to snap. "Inflammation of the periosteum about the eyes and cellular tissue of the lachrymal glands." Spots of ulceration on the cornea. Face and lips blue. The face is purple in convulsions and whooping cough; lips blue.
Inflammation of the tongue. Paralysis of the tongue. It is not an uncommon thing to find paralysis in Cuprum after convulsions. The violence of the convulsions seems to have brought about a reaction and paralytic weakness, a numbness and tingling, a loss of motility. "Spasms of the throat, preventing speech. Sensation as if constricted on swallowing. Great thirst for cold drinks." Many complaints are ameliorated by drinking cold water. The spasms are sometimes mitigated by drinking cold water. The cough is brought on sometimes by inhaling cold air, but stopped by drinking cold water, like Coccus cacti. "Desire for warm food and drinks. Eats hastily." Indigestion from milk.
Then there is nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea connected more or less with spasms. Spasms of the stomach. Spasms of the chest with diarrhoea and vomiting. Cramps of the calves and the fingers and toes. "Pressure in the stomach." In the stomach and bowels periodical cramps. Cramps coming periodically. It has cured colic in the form of violent cramps coming every two weeks with perfect regularity. It has pain in the stomach, and a pain under the xiphoid appendix that seems as if it would take his life. If it is not removed he will certainly die in a little while. Constriction across the chest, suffocation, cramps of the legs. Cuprum goes deep into the life, and it has many a time taken such a grand hold of an old hysterical subject that it has completely eradicated in a short time the hysterical tendency to cramp. In Cuprum particularly, early in the cramps the thumbs commence to draw down. It is with difficulty that they can be lifted up. They will draw back again, and then the fingers will clinch over them and draw so tightly it is painful. In children with such convulsions, and in hysterics with such convulsions, Cuprum goes deep into the life and eradicates this tendency to convulsions and cramps. Uraemic convulsions. Convulsions with suppressed or scanty urine. No urine in the bladder. In young girls beginning to menstruate, violent cramps in the limbs, cramps in the abdomen, diarrhoea, cramps in the uterus. Epileptic spasms coming at every menstrual period. Before or during menses, or after suppression, violent, unbearable cramps in the abdomen. A case something like this is not so very uncommon. Girls, at about the time of puberty, go in bathing, when their mothers have been a little too prudish, a little too sensitive, and have not told their daughters what they might expect, and to look out for bathing in cold water at certain times. The menstrual flow starts. From a cold bath she suppresses that flow and on come convulsions. That is in keeping with Cuprum. Hysterical convulsions they may be called. They will take the form, quite likely, of hysterical convulsions; they may take the form of chorea. Instead of convulsions it may take the form of congestion of the brain with violent delirium. Again, the menses not appearing after suppression, after sweat, and convulsions come on; frequent spasms during menses. Cuprum is not generally known to be such a wonderful medicine where there is anaemia; but it has chlorosis. It is a deep acting medicine. It affects with great power the whole voluntary system, the desires and aversions. It is suitable in those girls who have always had their own way, have never been crossed, and when they grow older, and reach puberty, and have got to submit to some sort of discipline or never become women, they have mad fits, have cramps. Cuprum will sometimes make them sensible, so in that way it fits into the loves and hates. It belongs to the voluntary system most prominently. Spasmodic respiration ; great dyspnoea, asthmatic breathing. Attacks of spasmodic asthma and most violent spasmodic coughs. "Dry, hard, difficult cough, rattling in the chest, spasms. Dry spasmodic cough until he suffocates. Face is red or purple."
CYCLAMEN
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Aversion to motion, yet motion ameliorates her pain and uneasiness. Aversion to the open air, yet open air ameliorates some symptoms, especially the coryza and cough. The marked dullness of the senses and special senses is a striking part of this picture.
Chlorosis; irregular menses; and palpitation. Stitching pains. Weakness and aggravation from exertion. Flabby muscles. Most symptoms ameliorated by walking. Very restless at night.
Great lassitude. Weakness in the evening, ameliorated by moving about. Sensitive to cold, and cold air. Complaints from being overheated. Alternations of moods is a striking feature of the mental state. Great flow of ideas alternates with weak memory.
Joyous feeling alternating with irritability. Serene humor changes suddenly into seriousness or peevishness. Grief and fear keep her in continuous mental agitation. Dullness of mind prevents mental labor. Absorbed in thought; seeks solitude; thinks about the future.
Answers incoherently; confusion of mind. Aversion to work, and dread of open air. Wants to remain in a warm room, and in solitude. Remains a long time silent. Excitement with trembling. Sadness, as if she had wronged somebody (Aur.).
Tearful and meditates upon her grief, which is only imaginary. Thinks she is alone in the world and persecuted by everyone (China). Obstinate and censorious. She grows steadily weaker; fainting spells come on; she becomes pale and anaemic.
These symptoms are important if associated with scanty menses or amenorrhoea. Vertigo when walking in the open air; objects turn in a circle; ameliorated in a room, and when sitting. Everything turns dark before the eyes, and she falls as if fainting.
The pain in the head is stunning, and makes her fear she will lose her senses. Boring, darting, pressing in forehead and temples. Violent pains in the forehead. Pains worse lying on painful side or back. Pains one-sided. Pain morning and evening, ameliorated by vomiting; worse by motion and in open air. Obscure vision with the pains. Pressure in vertex, as if brain were enveloped in a cloth, which would deprive him of his senses. Headache with flickering before the eyes on rising in the morning. Pulsating in the head. Rush of blood to the head; anxiety and confusion of mind; obscuration of vision ; vertigo; general coldness, after dinner. Headache ameliorated by cold applications. Headaches from disordered stomach. Head feels as if he bad on a skull cap. Tearing pains in the scalp.
In the field of vision there are spots, fog, bluish colors, flickerings, glittering objects, various colors now yellow, and again green; fiery sparks, smoke; halo around the light, black specks or flies. Dimness of vision. Diplopia. Convergent strabismus. Dilated pupils. Hemiopia. Heat and burning. Lids oedematous. Swelling of upper lids. Dryness and itching of lids. Dim vision during headache. Impaired vision, smell, hearing and taste.
Dullness of hearing. Humming, ringing and roaring in the ears. Drawing pains. Sense of smell diminished. Dryness in the nose. Dry, or fluent coryza, worse in a warm room, better in the open air or cool room. Sneezing and watery discharge in a warm room, entirely relieved - in the open air. Walking in the cold open air is his most comfortable pastime. Pressing pain over nasal bone during coryza. Takes cold from being overheated and from overheated rooms.
Pale, sickly face; dark under the eyes in woman. Contracted forehead a frown.
Dry lips. Numbness of upper lip. Boring, stitching, tearing in the teeth. Jerking in the teeth at night. Taste is lost, or perverted; flat; bad; putrid; rancid; all food tastes too salt. Tongue white, or yellowish. Burning blisters on tongue. Saliva increased. Burning, tip of tongue. Split tastes salty. Viscid mucus in the mouth. Burning, dryness and scraping in the throat.
Loss of appetite and even aversion to food. Thirstless, except in the evening during fever. Desires lemonade (Nit. ac., Bell., Sab.). Aversion to bread and butter, and fatty things; but desires inedible things. Disgust for meat; craves sardines. Satiety after the first mouthful (Lyc.) and then he loathes food. Stomach weak. Nausea after eating. Pork disagrees. The stomach symptoms are much like Pulsatilla. Symptoms worse after coffee. Vomiting after eating, Vomiting in the morning. Vomiting watery mucus. Eructations. Aching in the stomach and burning in oesophagus, better by walking about. Fullness, as if he had eaten too much. Weight in the stomach after eating. Stitching pains in the stomach.
Colicky pains in the abdomen, ameliorated by walking about. Tenderness all over the abdomen, even hypogastrium. Gnawing pains in the evening. Gnawing pains after food. Rumbling and gurgling in the abdomen. Paroxysmal cramps during the night, ameliorated by walking about. Stitching pains in the abdomen and liver.
Diarrhoea after coffee. Diarrhoea in chlorotic women subject to sick headaches and menstrual irregularities. 'Watery, forcible stool, odorless, brownish, yellow. Diarrhoea in the evening. Constipation; stool hard. Nausea. Colic before stool. Colic and urging after stool. Haemorrhoids that bleed. Drawing, pressing pain about the anus, as if a spot would suppurate.
Frequent urging to urinate. Ineffectual urging to urinate. Urine profuse, watery. Flocculent sediment; iridescent cuticle. Stitching in the urethra with desire to urinate. In the male the sexual desire is diminished. Irritable prostate gland, with stitching pains; urging to stool and urine (Nux).
Menses too soon, or too late; irregular, or suppressed; copious, prolonged, or scanty. When profuse, the mental symptoms are better. Flow black and clotted. Labor-like pains at the menstrual period, commencing in small of back and running down each side of the pubes. Uterine haemorrhage. Dread of open air. Menses suppressed, palpitation of the heart, weeping, aversion to company and dread of open air. Rush of blood to the head, and scanty flow. Suppressed menses from over-exertion, or being overheated. Fainting at the menstrual period. After menses, milk in mammae. Complaints after weaning (China).
Much scraping in the larynx at night, thick, white mucus. Tickling in the larynx and trachea. Oppression of chest. Suffocative cough,. caused by scraping and dryness in the trachea. Cough comes on during sleep, from dryness and constriction of larynx. Cough ameliorated in the open air, even in a cold wind.
Pressure in the middle of the sternum. Weakness in the chest. Stitching in the chest and heart. Tearing, stitching, and shortness of breath during motion and rest. Palpitation and anaemic murmurs. Tumultuous action of the heart; great lassitude. Weak pulse. Sensation as if air streamed from nipples. Mammae swollen, containing milk in non-pregnant women. Mammae swollen and very hard after menses.
Drawing pains in the neck, with stiffness. Twinges up the back, ameliorated by drawing the shoulders back. Stitching in the region of the right kidney, worse during inhalation. Pain in the small of the back while sitting, ceases on rising.
Tearing, drawing pains in the limbs. Hyperaesthesia of the skin. Flabby muscles. Tearing, drawing in the upper limbs. Sensation of weakness of the hands, as if she must let fall what she holds in her hands. Writer's cramp. Drawing pains in flexors of the leg. Burning sore pain in heels. Toes feel dead after walking. Weakness in the limbs.
Sleep not restful, disturbed by anxious dreams; frightful, vivid dreams. Restless sleep. Late falling asleep. Wakens early, but wants to sleep late. Nightmare. Wakens early, but 'too tired and sleepy, cannot rise. Pollutions in dreams. Chill, fever and sweat. Chill not ameliorated by warm clothing.
Chilliness during menses. Chill forenoon or evening. Chill predominates in the evening. Heat of face follows chill. Chill and heat alternate. Sensation of heat through whole body, particularly in face and hands. Heat, with swelling of the veins (China). General heat after eating. Sweat at night during sleep, offensive. Sweat sometimes on lower part of body. Itching at night in bed. Numbness after scratching, or changing places by scratching.
DIGITALIS
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This drug as used by the Old School has done more mischief than any one drug in their Materia Medica. Every patient who had a fast heart, or anything the matter with the heart, was given Digitalis. It has caused more deaths than any drug. If administered when the heart is going fast it will soon produce a peculiar kind of paralysis; the heart then having lost its balance-wheel, compensation gives out, the patient sinks and finally dies. They do not know that many patients would have lived through fevers, pneumonia and other acute diseases if it had not been for this medicine, used as they have used it, in the tincture, in many-drop doses, until the heart was slowed down.
They call it sedative; yes, it is a sedative. It makes the patient very sedate. You have seen how very sedate a patient looks after he has been in the hands of an undertaker and has on his best garments. That is what Digitalis does. In that way it is a sedative in the hands of the allopath. A homoeopathic physician never prescribes to bring down the pulse. He prescribes for the patient and the heart's action takes care of itself.
Digitalis is a very poor fever medicine. Instead of being indicated when the pulse is fast, the proving says it is indicated when the pulse is slow. The allopath gives it when the pulse is fast to make it slow; if given to a well person it will make the pulse slow, and when indicated in a sick person the pulse is slow.
It produces a great disturbance of the liver. "Congestion and enlargement of the liver. Soreness of the liver." Tenderness about the liver but during that time the pulse is slow. It makes the bowels very sluggish, produces inactivity of the liver, and stools are bileless, light colored, putty-like and the pulse is slow. Add to that jaundice and you -have a grand picture of Digitalis. Jaundice, with slow pulse, with uneasiness in the liver, pale stool, and even if you have never seen or heard of Digitalis before you will scarcely miss it. Now, you might add a myriad of little symptoms, but it does not change the aspect of things. It is Digitalis.
Another group of symptoms that belongs with the Digitalis heart, the Digitalis liver and the Digitalis bowels, is a gone, sinking feeling in the stomach. It seems as if he would die, and he does not get better from eating. It is a nervous, deathly sinking that comes with many heart troubles. You would not be surprised to find in Digitalis much nervous prostration. Restlessness and great nervous weakness. "Feels as if he would fly y to pieces. Anxiety. Feels that something is going to happen." Seems as if his whole economy were full of anxious feelings and restlessness. Lassitude, faintness, exhaustion and extreme prostration. Faints on the slightest provocation. It begins in the stomach; an awful sensation of weakness in the stomach and bowels.
His sleep is full of horrible dreams, nightmare, fright. Dreams of falling that is very common with cardiac affections. When the pulse is too slow, when it is irregular, the brain is irregularly supplied with blood during sleep, and there is a turbulent state. A shoe goes through the body like an electric shock, like internal jerkings, twitchings. Sudden muscular movements; as if a current of electric passed through the body. This, with slow pulse, with a sense of faintness, and great weakness. Bluish paleness of the lips in persons who suffer at times with cardiac spells it seems at times as if the pulse would cease. Face becomes blue, the fingers become blue. Wants to lie on the back. Frequently startled in sleep; jerking at night.
The heart symptoms are numerous, but none is so important as the slow pulse. The pulse is slow in the beginning of the case. It may now be flying like lightning. He is anxious, restless, has horrible dreams and sinking in the stomach, that sounds like the advanced stage of Digitalis, but I want to know if in the beginning, the pulse was slow. The patient himself seldom knows, but someone says that in the beginning the pulse was 48; that is Digitalis. If the pulse in the beginning was rapid do not think of Digitalis, for it will not do any good. The Digitalis pulse is at first slow and perhaps remains so for many days, until finally the heart commences to go with a quiver, with an irregular beat, intermits, feels as if it would cease to beat, and then we have all these strange manifestations. Weakness is the very character of the Digitalis pulse, and all these characteristics go along with it. First it is slow, and sometimes strong. Slow, strong pulse when rheumatism is threatening the heart. "Violent, but not very rapid pulse. Sudden violent beating of the heart, with disturbed rhythm." The slightest motion increases anxiety and palpitation. When the pulse is going very slow, sometimes down to 40, the patient turns the head and the pulse flutters and increases in its action. If he turns over in bed it seems as if the heart would stop. If he moves he feels it fluttering all over him, and it settles back and is slow again; but, finally, it changes and flutters all the time.
Palpitation of the heart originating in grief. Sudden sensation as though the heart stood still. Fluttering of the heart. The least muscular exertion renders the heart's action labored and intermittent in a feeble heart. A person with an enlarged liver, with a slow pulse, with jaundice and pale stool. With that he will have a troublesome cough. Digitalis is not much of a remedy for a cough unless it is a cardiac cough. Cough at midnight. Cough, with expectoration of "boiled starch." Cough, with expectoration of bloody mucus in hypostatic congestion of the lungs. Cough, brought on by talking, walking, drinking anything cold, bending the body. These are coughs associated with other troubles.
The same thing is to be said of the respiration. There are difficulties of respiration, along with cardiac troubles and liver troubles. "Respiration irregular -and performed with -great difficulty. Constant desire to take a deep breath. When he goes to sleep the breath seems to fade away, then he wakes up with a gasp. Lachesis, Phosphorus, Carbo veg. and some other remedies have that; remedies that affect the cerebellum particularly, producing a congestion of the cerebellum. When a patient goes to sleep the cerebrum says to the cerebellum: "Now you carry on this breathing a little while, I am getting tired." But the cerebellum is not equal to the occasion. It is congested, and just as soon as the cerebrum begins to rest the cerebellum goes to sleep, too, and lets the patient suffer ; and in that way we get suffocation. The cerebellum presides over respiration during sleep and the cerebrum presides over respiration when the patient is awake. We might learn that from the provings of medicines if we never found it before.
"Fear of suffocation at night." Now, to analyze that. He knows from experience that every time he drops into a sleep he suffocates, and hence he fears to go to sleep for fear he will suffocate. The fear of suffocation at night is from this origin. It is the same if he falls asleep in the day time. "Can only breathe in gasps." Digitalis is a useful medicine when there is a filling up of the lower part of the lungs. The patient is sitting up in bed, and there is dullness in the lower part of each lung and plenty of resonance in the upper portion. Then it is, if he lies down, he will suffocate. Digitalis likes mostly to lie flat on the back with no pillow, when there is no filling up of the lungs. But when there is hypostatic congestion he suffocates. If early in the case the pulse was slow and it has become fast, Digitalis may be of some benefit.
Now, a feature in connection with the genito-urinary organs. In old cases of enlarged prostate glands I do not know what I would do without Digitalis. Where there is a constant teasing to pass urine. In many instances where the catheter has been used for months or years because he is unable to pass urine in a natural way, and where there is a residuary urine in old bachelors and old men, Digitalis is a good remedy. It diminishes the size of the prostate gland and has many times cured. "Dropsy with suppression of urine." In uraemic poisoning and in various phases of Bright's disease of the kidneys we have symptoms indicating Digitalis. Retention of urine; dribbling of urine. Spermatorrhoea. Nightly emission. In persons addicted for years to secret vices. Enlarged prostate gland.
It is capable of curing chronic gonorrhoea. It has cured acute gonorrhoea. It has cured inflammation of that thin, delicate membrane covering the glans penis. Dropsical swelling of the genitals.
"Loss of appetite and violent thirst." Most doctors give Sulphur when the patient drinks much and eats little. The nausea of Digitalis is not like that of Ipecac. and Bryonia. It is a singular nausea. The smell of food excites a deathly nausea, a sinking, a goneness, asso ciated with cardiac troubles, with jaundice and liver troubles. The nausea is accompanied by a deathly feeling, as if he is sinking away. Sometimes the nausea is relieved by eating, but the sinking remains after eating, showing that it is something besides hunger. "Persistent nausea. Extreme sensitiveness in the pit of the stomach. Faintness and sinking in the pit of the stomach as if he would die. No appetite, but great thirst. Soreness and hardness in the region of the liver. Sensitiveness to pressure in the region of the liver." Now remember the liver and the heart symptoms, the jaundice, the slow pulse, the awful sinking in the stomach, the enlargement of the prostate gland, the gray stool, and you have the principal symptoms of Digitalis.
After all that I have said you are not surprised at the horrible anxiety that the Digitalis patient carries with him all the time. He wants to be alone; sadness, melancholy, despondency and restlessness. He can't decide upon anything that he ought to do; tremulousness. The stomach, bowel and liver troubles are just what you see sometimes in a hard drinker after trying to break off. He is prostrated; his heart gives out, is irregular, weak, slow; and he has sadness and melancholy; inability to apply himself. Digitalis will help him straighten out.
DULCAMARA BITTER SWEET
This medicine seems especially to affect the mucous membranes. It appears to have a tendency to establish or ultimate discharges, both acute and chronic.
The Dulcamara patient is disturbed by every change in the weather, from warm to cold, from dry to moist, and from suddenly cooling the body while perspiring. He is ameliorated in dry, even weather; cold and damp aggravate all the conditions. He is worse evening and night and during rest.
Dulcamara produces catarrh of the stomach, intestines, nose, eyes, ears, and inflammatory conditions of the skin with eruptions. If you go through any of these in detail, you will be astonished to find how disturbed is the constitutional state of this patient by weather changes.
It is a medicine wonderfully useful in diarrhoea, at the close of the summer, hot days and cold nights, with changeable stool; diarrhoea of infants. There seems to be no digestion; yellow, slimy stool; yellow-green stool, with undigested stool; frequent stool, blood in the stool and quite a mass of slime, showing a marked catarrhal state. This gets better and worse; this gets better under ordinary remedies; it will often get better from Pulsatilla, because Pulsatilla symptoms seem to predominate, and sometimes it is relieved by Arnica; but every time the child takes cold, it comes back again, and soon the physician will realize that he has not struck the remedy belonging to all the symptoms. It is very often an annoying condition, because the symptoms are not recognized until two or three attacks have come. It is not easy to discover that the attacks come on from cold.
Every year women bring their babies back from the mountains, at the end of the season, and then we get some Dulcamara cases. One needs to be in the mountains at the close of the summer season to know what the condition is. If you go into the mountains at such a time, either in the North or West, you will notice that the sun's rays beat down during the day with great force, but along towards sunset if you walk out a draft of cold air comes down that will chill you to the bone. This will make the baby sick; it is too warm to take the child out in the middle of the day, and so he is taken out in his carriage in the evening; he has been overheated in the house during the day, and then catches this draft in the evening. Dulcamara is suitable for conditions that would arise from just such a state So with an adult who has been out in the heat of the sun and catches the cold draft by night, which means hot days and cold nights, such as occur in the fall of the year, at the close of the summer and coming in of the winter; this intermingling of hot air and cold drafts. You go up towards the foot of the hills after a hot day, you will walk through a stratum of air that will make you perspire and the next minute a cold air that will make you want your overcoat on, and then again a stratum of hot air and so on. Such a state will bring out a sweat and then suppress it. The symptoms that come from Dulcamara seem to be like symptoms that arise from just such causes. And we are free, then, to infer from such an experience that Dulcamara cures these cases. I have been puzzled in times past over these babies that have been brought home from the mountains, and have prescribed upon the visible symptoms, until I thought about the matter carefully and figured it out that they had come from these hot and cold regions. Babies have to be hurried home at times, because of the diarrhoeas that cannot be cured in the mountains, but a dose of Dulcamara will enable them to stay there and live right in that same climate. Chronic recurrent dysentery from cold. If they have a dose of Dulcamara it fortifies them against the continual taking of cold.
There are people in a certain kind of business that really constitute a Dulcamara state. Suppose we look at our ice-cream men and our ice handlers and cold storage men; in a cold room they are handling ice; the summer weather is hot, they must go out and take some of the heat, and then they go back into their cold rooms and handle the ice. I have seen these things and have had occasion to follow them out. These men are subject at times to bowel troubles, and other catarrhal affections, but generally to diarrhoeic affections. Their business cannot stop because it is their means of living. Dulcamara cures such chronic diarrhoeas when the symptoms agree. Arsenicum is a medicine that would be suitable for such patients if the symptoms agreed, but the symptoms at times agree with Dulcamara, for that is the nature of the remedy, to take cold from cold, damp places, from suppressing a sweat, from going out of a hot atmosphere into an ice house, into icy rooms ; into cold rooms ; in this climate such complaints as come on from overexertion, overheating, and then throwing off the clothing and becoming chilled, suppressing the sweat; fevers may come on, aching in the bones, trembling with the, aching, trembling in the muscles, and as the fever goes on, he is in a distressed state, cannot remember, forgets what he was about to speak of, forgets the word that would naturally express his idea, and he enters into a dazed state, a state of confusion. It suits these colds that have this sluggish circulation of the brain, with trembling and chilliness, coldness as if in the bones.
Dulcamara is full of rheumatism, full of rheumatic pains and aches, sore and bruised all over; the joints are inflamed, become red, sensitive to touch and are swollen. It is suitable in cases of inflammatory rheumatism, due to suppressed perspiration, induced by changing from a high to low temperature, or from cold, wet weather. Worse evening and night and during rest.
Now, it has many chronic complaints. A catarrhal condition of the eyes, purulent discharges, thick, yellow discharges, granular lids; eyes become red every time he takes cold; "every time he takes cold it settles in the eyes," is a common expression of the patient. The patient will often ask the question, "Why is it, doctor, that every time I take cold it settles in my eyes? If I get into a cold atmosphere, or take off my coat after being heated, I have to look out." If it becomes cold in the night and he has thrown the clothes off, he takes cold, or, if a cold rain comes on, he takes cold and then has sore eyes. Such eyes are very often effectually cured by Dulcamara. As to the eye itself, it is only an ordinary catarrhal state, but the manner in which it comes on is the important thing. That is the nature of the patient to have sore eyes whenever he takes cold; it belongs to some other remedies as well, but this one particularly.
Dulcamara has also catarrhal discharges from the nose, with bloody crusts; blowing out thick, yellow mucus all the time. In infants and children who have sniffles, , they are always worse in cold, damp weather. When the patient says: "Doctor, in cold, damp weather I cannot breathe through my nose; my nose stuffs up;" or, "I must sleep with my mouth open." Dulcamara is a very useful remedy to know in catarrhal cases that always stuff up when there is a cold rain.
It is markedly an autumnal remedy. The Dulcamara patients go through the summer very comfortably; their catarrhal conditions to a great extent pass away.; the warm days and warm nights, because of the even temperature, seem to agree with them, but as soon as the cold nights come on and the cold rains come, all their difficulties return; there is an increase of the rheumatism and of the catarrhal discharges.
This medicine has been used a long time by our mothers. They used to make ointments out of Dulcamara. You will find that the old ladies, in almost any rural district in which Dulcamara grows, gather it and make it into a salve for ulcers. Well, it is astonishing how soothing it is when applied externally to smarting wounds, whether in solution or salve or any other way. But it is a better medicine, of course, when indicated by symptoms of the constitutional state; it is a better medicine if used internally. It produces ulcers and a tendency to ulceration of the mucous membranes and this condition will become phagedenic. Sometimes it starts as nothing more than an herpetic eruption, but it spreads and finally yellow pus forms and then the granulations that should come, do not come; an eating condition appears and the surface does not heal. Especially along the shin bone, there will be raw places, which even extend to the periosteum, to the bone, producing necrosis and caries; so we have affections of the mucous membranes or skin, first becoming vesiculated and then breaking open and eating. It is especially related to very sensitive, bleeding ulcers with false granulations, phagedenic ulcers. This is not generally known; it is a matter of experience with those that have watched this medicine; and again, strange to say, Arsenicum, which I have already mentioned once or twice, has this state. Arsenicum leads all other medicines for ulcers that eat phagedenic ulcers. Arsenicum is a typical remedy for spreading sores, for spreading ulcers, and especially those that come from a bubo, that has been opened and will not heal.
Another feature of this medicine is its tendency to throw out eruptions over the body. It is a wonderfully eruptive medicine, producing vesicles, crusts, dry, brown crusts, humid crusts, herpes. Dulcamara produces eruptions so nearly like impetigo that it has been found a useful remedy in that condition, i. e., multiple little boil-like eruptions; it produces little boils, and the boils spread. Enlargement and hardness of the glands. Eruptions upon the scalp that look so much like crusta Iactea that Dulcamara has been found a very useful medicine. Extreme soreness, itching, and the itching is not relieved by scratching, and the scratching goes on until bleeding and rawness take place. Eruptions that come out upon the face, upon the forehead, all over the nose, but especially on the cheeks, which become completely covered with these crusts; eczema of infants. Children only a few weeks old break out with these scalp eruptions, and Dulcamara is one of the medicines that you will need to know. It is about as frequently indicated as any of the medicines. Sepia, Arsenicum, Graphites, Dulcamara, Petroleum, Sulphur and Calcarea are about equally indicated, but of these, in this climate at least, I think Sepia is probably more frequently indicated.
All of these catarrhal symptoms, the rheumatic symptoms, the eruptions upon the skin, are subject to the peculiar aggravations of the constitutional state. No matter what the symptoms are, the constitutional state is worse in cold, damp weather.
"Catarrhal and rheumatic headaches in cold, damp weather." When the headache is the main trouble, the catarrh takes a different course from what it does when the catarrh is the principal ailment. There are two ways in which that conducts itself. In some Dulcamara patients, whenever he takes cold from the cold, damp weather, he commences to sneeze, and to get a coryza, and soon comes a copious, thick, yellow flow from the nose. On the other hand, Dulcamara has a dry catarrh in its first stage, and a fluid catarrh only in the second stage. One who is subject to Dulcamara headaches, has the dry catarrh; whenever he takes cold instead of the usual catarrhal flow with it, he at first sneezes and then feels a dryness in the air passages, a slacking up of the usual discharge, which would give him relief, and then he knows that he must look out, for along will come the neuralgic pains, pains in the occiput, and finally over the whole head. Congestive headaches, with neuralgic pains and dry nose. Every spell of cold, damp weather will bring on that headache. The catarrh is not always acute enough for him to pay attention to it. He does not say very much about it. The Dulcamara headache is very severe, is accompanied by tremendous pains, and he may go to the doctor with the idea of getting rid of the headache, but it is a catarrhal state that is suppressed, that has slackened up, and the nose becomes dry. As soon as the flow starts up his headache is relieved. Then headache of this catarrhal kind that comes on from every cold, damp spell, or from getting overheated, from getting into a cold draft after being overheated, or getting overheated with too much clothing, and then throwing the coat off, will also belong to the Dulcamara state.
A form of eruption that is very likely to be a Dulcamara eruption is the ringworm, herpes circinatus. It comes sometimes upon the face and scalp. Children sometimes have ringworms in the hair. Dulcamara will nearly always cure these ringworms in the hair.
The Dulcamara child is very susceptible to earache.
"Coryza dry, relieved by motion, worse during rest, and renewed by the slightest exposure, and worse in cold air." Some coryzas cannot tolerate the warm room, and others want a warm room. The Dulcamara coryza is worse going out in the open air and better from motion. The Nux vomica coryza is better in the open air. The patient feels much aching distress in the nose. The Nux vomica patient ordinarily wants warmth and warm air and a warm room, but with the coryza he is the very opposite; he wants motion in the open air, he looks for cool air, for it relieves the distressing sensation. In the warm room there is a tickling sensation in the nose, and the nose will drip, night and day. The Nux vomica coryza is worse in the house, and worse in the night, and worse in the warm bed, so that the discharge will run all, over the pillow. In Dulcamara it is more fluent in the house, in the warmth, and less fluent in the cold air in a cold room.
With the Dulcamara coryza, if the patient should go into a cold room pain will commence in the nasal bones and he will begin to sneeze, and water will be discharged from the nose. That very state would relieve a Nux vomica patient. Allium cepa is made worse in a warm room; like Nux vomica, is better in cold, open air. Commences to sneeze as soon as he gets into a warm room. So that we see the meaning of such things, the necessity of going into particulars and examining every case.
Here is a state that you will often find in the fall of the year, somewhere about August 20th. They sometimes call it hay fever. Every year as the nights become cold, and there is cold, damp weather and fall rains, he has a stuffing up of the nose with constant sneezing and wants the nose kept warm. I have known these cases at times to sit in a warm room with cloths, wrung out of hot water, over the face and nose to relieve the distress, the catarrhal state of the eyes and the stuffing up of the nose. Heat relieves the stuffing up of the nose. These patients can sometimes breathe with these hot cloths over the nose, but if they go out into the night air, or a cold place, and especially if there is a damp, fall rain, they suffer much. Other cases of hay fever suffer during the day, and they go to as cold a place as they can find, and are even driven to the mountains for a cool place. These things are indicative of a state of the constitution; the state gives out signs and symptoms to lead the intelligent physician to cure. If that state had no means of making itself known by signs and symptoms, there could be no curing it by remedies.
"Profuse discharge of water from the nose and eyes, worse in the open air," "better in a closed room, on awakening in the morning," etc. The Dulcamara patient is so sensitive to newly mown grass and drying weeds, that he is obliged to absent himself from the country where they are found. For hay fever we have especially to look up such remedies as have complaints worse in the fall of the year. There are other conditions that are just as much hay fever, for instance, "rose cold" that comes on in June. There are other conditions that come on in the spring, sometimes cured by Naja and Lachesis. So that we have to observe the time of the year, the time of 'the day, night or day aggravations; the wet and the dry remedies, the hot and the cold remedies. We have to study the remedy by circumstances.
The Dulcamara patient often becomes a sickly patient; with threatening of the catarrhal discharges to center in the bronchial tubes, i. e., in the mucous membrane of the breathing apparatus. Many adults die of acute phthisis that might have been cured by Dulcamara, and you will find very commonly among this class of patients those that are worse from every cold, damp spell of weather. Such enter right into the Dulcamara sphere. They are better by going south where there is a continuously warm climate. The Dulcamara patient is a sickly patient, threatened with acute phthisis; pallid face, sickly, yellow and sallow. This shows that it goes deeply into the life, creating such disorders as are found in very sick patients, i. e., those chronically sick, in persons whose vital economy is so much disordered that it cannot keep the body in repair.
The throat comes in for its share of trouble. Persons who in every cold damp spell have a sore throat, from getting overheated, throwing off the wraps, getting into a cold place. The Dulcamara patient says: "Well now, I know I am fixed; I am now chilled; I begin to feel hoarseness in my throat." On comes the sore throat; it fills with mucus, with yellow slime; the tonsils become inflamed; even quinsy comes on. Or it may affect the throat uniformly; it may become red and inflamed and dry at times, and at other times filled with mucus, and at night the throat fills with thick, yellow, tough mucus, which is hawked up in great quantities. These colds that settle first in the nose and throat, post-nasal catarrh, of the very worst sort, gradually creep on until the whole respiratory apparatus is in a state of catarrhal inflammation. Every cold that he takes aggravates his catarrh wherever that may be. If it be in the nose, then the nose is aggravated; if in the chest, then those parts are aggravated. A continual rousing up. Every experienced physician must have met with many cases where for a time he felt unable to cope with the case because of his inability to reach the constitutional state that underlies this continual taking cold. So he puzzles, for a long time, and prescribes on the immediate attack and palliates it. For instance, the immediate attack might look like Belladonna or Bryonia, Ferrum phos. or Arsenicum, etc.; he treats that attack without taking into consideration the underlying constitutional state of the patient. It is quite a profitable business for one who has not much conscience and not much intelligence. But a conscientious physician feels worried and knows he is not doing what he ought to do by his patient, unless he reaches out for the remedy which touches, the constitution. It is far more useful to keep people from taking colds than to cure colds.
There is a form of acute Bright's disease that Dulcamara cures. You can probably now surmise from what we have said of the nature of the remedy, that in cases of Bright's disease following scarlet fever, or from malaria, or in any acute disease that has ended badly, i. c., the patient has been exposed to the cold too soon, and has taken "cold," or from sudden change of weather, damp and cold, the feet commences to swell, there is albumin in the urine, the limbs are waxy, the face becomes waxy and sallow, and there is constant urging to urinate. Dulcamara, with other constitutional symptoms, will be-suitable.
In bladder catarrh, where there is a copious discharge of mucus, or muco-pus in the urine; when the urine stands, a thick, purulent sediment, yellowish-white, and a constant urging to urinate; every time he takes a little cold, the urine becomes bloody, the frequency of urination is increased, the urine becomes irritating, the catarrh of the bladder rouses up like a flame; all the symptoms are worse in cold, damp weather, and from getting chilled; better from becoming warm. So you see whether it is a catarrh of the kidney or a catarrhal state of the bladder, or an attack of dysentery, or an attack of sudden diarrhoea, every cold spell of the weather brings on an increase of the trouble.
There is another Dulcamara symptom which will often be expressed suddenly in the midst of a lot of other symptoms. After you have been hunting for a long time, the patient will say: "Doctor, if I get chilled, I must hurry to urinate; if I get into a cold place, I have to go to stool, or to urinate." So we see that the symptoms come on when the patient is cold, and are better when he is warm. Any catarrhal trouble of the bladder that is better in the summer and worse in the winter.
In dry, teasing coughs that are winter "colds," that go away in the summer and return in the winter. Psorinum has a dry, teasing, winter cough. Arsenicum has a winter cough.
"Rash comes out upon the face before the menses." "As a forerunner of catamenia, with extraordinary sexual excitement, herpetic eruptions." Its "cold" sores are very troublesome. The patients are subject to these "cold" sores upon the lips and upon the genitals. Every time he takes "cold," herpes labialis, herpes preputialis. "Catarrhal ailments in cold, damp weather." "Mammae engorged, hard, sore and painful." "Mammary glands swollen, inactive, painless, itching, in consequence of a `cold' which seems to have settled in them."
"Cough, from damp, cold atmosphere, or from getting wet" "Cough, dry, hoarse and rough, or loose, with copious expectoration of mucus and dull hearing; catarrhal fever." The cough is worse lying and in a warm room and better in the open air.
Rheumatic lameness and stiffness in the back from taking cold better by motion. Drawing pain in the lumbar region extending to the lower limbs during rest. Stiff neck from every exposure to cold. Stitching, tearing, rheumatic pains in limbs after exposure to cold, better by motion, worse at night or in the evening, with some fever. Sore, bruised feeling all over the body. Warts on hands, fingers and face.
EUPATORIUM PERFOLIATUM (BONESET)
Every time I take up one of these old domestic remedies I am astonished at the extended discoveries of medical properties in the household as seen in their domestic use. All through the Eastern States, in the rural districts, among the first old settlers, Boneset-tea was a medicine for colds. For every cold in the head, or running of the nose, every bone-ache or high fever, or headache from cold, the good old housewife had her Boneset-tea ready. Sure enough it did such things, and the provings sustain its use. The proving shows that Boneset produces upon healthy people symptoms like the colds the old farmers used to suffer from.
The common winter colds through the Eastern States and the North are attended with much sneezing and coryza, pain in the head, as if it would burst, which is aggravated from motion, chilliness with the desire to be warmly covered; the bones ache as if they would break; there is fever, thirst, and a general aggravation from motion. Such common everyday colds correspond sometimes to Eupatorium and sometimes to Bryonia. These two remedies are very similar, but the aching in the bones is marked in Eupatorium. If this state goes on for a few days the patient will become yellow, the cold will settle in the chest, a pneumonia may develop, or an inflammation of the liver, or an attack commonly called a bilious fever. Such fevers frequently call for Bryonia and Eupatorium, each fitting its own cases. These remedies are especially useful throughout New England, New York, Ohio, the North and Canada. They do not have this kind of a cold very frequently in the warmer climates, but Eupatorium is often indicated in the warmer climates for fevers, yellow fever, bilious fever, break-bone fever and intermittent fever. It seems to be useful in one kind of complaints in one climate and in another kind of complaints in another climate.
In the Southwest and the West, in the valleys of the great rivers, Eupatorium cures complaints beginning as if the back would break, great shivering from head to foot spreading from the back, great sensitiveness to cold, congestive headaches, flushed face, yellow skin and yellow eyes, pain in the abdomen, and in the region of the liver, inability to retain any food, nausea from the sight and smell of food; the bones ache as if they would break, the fever runs high, the urine is of a mahogany color, the tongue is heavily coated yellow, and there is nausea and vomiting of bile. That gives the picture of Eupatorium in the Mississippi Valley, in the Ohio Valley, in Florida and Alabama, and all through the Southern States. The most prominent symptoms are the vomiting of bile, the aching of the bones as if they would break, the pains in the stomach after eating, and the nausea from the thought and smell of food. The stomach is very irritable; the thought of food gags him. The patient desires to keep still, but the pain is so severe that he must move and so he appears restless. These are among the acute manifestations, and are things only very general that we must take up and apply to sick people.
Eupatorium has been a very useful remedy in intermittent fever, when epidemic in the valleys. Among the first signs is nausea some time before the attack, and there are sometimes spells of vomiting of bile. About seven or nine o'clock in the forenoon, he commences to shudder, the shivering runs down the back and spreads from the back to the extremities; he has violent thirst, but the shiverings are made worse from drinking so that he dare not drink cold water. There is soreness and pulsation in the back of the head, violent pain in the occiput and back before and during the chill. During the chill he wants to cover up and the clothing needs to be piled on. The thirst extends through all the stages. At the close of the chill there is vomiting; often it does not occur until the heat, but before the sweat fairly sets in he vomits copiously, first the contents of the stomach and then bile. When the heat is on he seems to burn all over, sometimes as though with electric sparks. Intense heat, burning in the top of the head, his feet burn and his skin burns. The burning is more intense than the heat would justify. It is characteristic of this remedy for the sweat to be scanty; a violent chill, intense fever which passes off slowly, and very scanty sweat. The bones ache as if they would break. During the chill his head aches as if it would burst, it throbs, it tears, it stings, it burns; he describes the headache in terms expressive of violence, as if probably a congestive headache. One would think after the fever subsides and he commences to sweat a little that he would get relief, which is true excepting the headache, which often gets worse clear through to the end of the attack, and sometimes it will last all day and night; then he will have a whole day free- from - the headache, but on the third day at seven or nine o'clock on will come the same trouble with increasing violence. At times these attacks are prolonged, the one will extend into the other, that is, enter into a sort of remittent character with no- intermission. The longer this runs the more the liver becomes engorged, and finally the urine is loaded with bile, the stool becomes whitish, the fever increases, the nausea increasing, the tongue becomes pointed and elongated, and is dry, the headache is extremely painful, and a state of masked fever comes on.
In those intermittent fevers that begin with violent shaking, and the headache continues without sweat, or, if with sweat the headache is made worse, thirst during all stages, vomiting of bile at the close of the heat or during the heat, with the awful bone aches, the Western men, who study their Materia Medica, know that they have a sure cure in Eupatorium. The time for the administration of this dose is at the dose of the paroxysm. You get the best effect when reaction is at the best, and that is when reaction is setting in, after a paroxysm has passed off. That is true of every paroxysmal disease, where it is possible to wait until the end. You cannot mitigate them very much during the attack, indeed, if the medicine is given then it very often increases the difficulty, but if you wait until the close of the paroxysm you get the full benefit of your medicine, and the next paroxysm will not develop, or will be lighter, or, if another attack is brought on immediately, you may rest assured there will be no more. It is not an uncommon thing in intermittent fever, when the remedy has been administered at the dose of the paroxysm, for the next paroxysm to come within twenty-four hours after the administration of the medicine; these mixed cases are often in a state of disorder. One who does not know this would immediately show the white feather, would be alarmed, would be afraid the patient was getting worse, but you have only to wait for the subsidence of the attack and you will see that you have broken its cycle and periodicity.
When this remedy has been apparently indicated by intermittents, and it has not proved of sufficient depth to root out the intermittent, there are two remedies, either of which is likely to follow it, and these are Natrum muriaticum and Sepia. These two remedies are very closely related to Eupatorium and take up the work where it leaves off, when the symptoms agree.
This medicine has also a chronic constitutional state, viz.: its gouty nature. It is a very useful medicine in gout. It has gouty soreness and inflamed nodosities of the finger joints, of the elbow joint, pain and gouty swelling of the great toe, red tumefaction of the joint of the great toe. It establishes, in persons who are subject to chalk stone, deposits around the finger joints. These gouty subjects take -cold, the bones ache, the joints become inflamed, the patient will say he is chilly, the skin becomes yellow, the urine is charged with bile, the stool becomes whitish, and he becomes weak. In many instances these patients have been for years resorting to Burgundy for relief of their gouty joints and the weakness. Some one of our homoeopathic remedies will relieve the suffering, but in those old gouty subjects who have been always drinking wine, you cannot take the wine away from them at once; you cannot do it while they are having the attack, because they have become so accustomed to it. Burgundy is the kind of wine very commonly used by the gouty, but the Scotch-man with his gout thinks he must always have a little Scotch whiskey, and in the attack it is quite impossible to take it away from him. What has been his custom must be followed out for a while because he would grow weaker, but it is damaging him, and hence it is difficult to contend with gouty subjects who have been taking stimulants. You do not get the full benefit of Homoeopathy and you cannot stop his stimulants because weakness will follow. Persons who have not taken wine as a regular beverage can and should do without it, as it interferes with the action of the homoeopathic remedy.
These gouty patients have terrible sick headaches. Pain in the base of the brain and back of the head, associated with gouty joints. These are often referred to as arthritic headaches, that is, gouty headaches, headaches associated with painful joints. Or the headaches may alternate with pains in the joints. Congestive headaches, the pain being in the base of the brain, with more or less throbbing; the pain spreads up through the head and produces a general congestive attack. Sometimes these headaches come on when the joints are feeling better, and the more headache he has the less pain he has in the extremities ; and again, when the gout affects the extremities, then the headaches diminish. Headaches, having a third and seventh-day aggravation, coming with more or less periodicity. With the headache there will be nausea and vomiting of bile, nausea at the thought and smell of food. This gouty individual is also subject to vertigo, and the sensation as if he would fall to the left is especially noted with the coming on of the headache. The vertigo comes on in the morning; when he gets up he feels as if he would sway to the left, and he has to guard himself in turning to the left. Sometimes in intermittent fever this symptom of swaying to the left and vertigo ending in nausea and vomiting, violent pain in the back of the head and pain in the bones, are the first threatenings.
We have in this remedy also other gouty manifestations: shooting through the temples, shooting from the left to the right side of the head; shooting all through the head; stitching, tearing pains in the- limbs as well as the bone aches. The headaches are so violent that they make him sick at the stomach. In gouty headaches, in intermittents at the close of the intense heat, in periodical headaches, the course is the same, the pain is so intense that nausea is soon brought on and then he vomits bile. Eupatorium has not been used on its symptoms in gouty states as often as it might have been. In inter mittent fever it is well known; in headaches it is only occasionally used. Only occasionally does a man realize its great benefit in headaches and in remittent fevers. In gouty and rheumatic affections it may be suited to the symptoms and is more useful than is generally known. It is not the purpose of our talks to point out ultimates of disease. I do not look upon gout as a disease, but as a great class of symptoms of a rheumatic character that occur in the human family; a great mass of symptoms that may be called gouty, a tendency to enlargement of the joints and gouty deposits in the urine. The ordinary so-called lithaemia is a gouty constitution. The gouty state of the economy is the superficial or apparent cause; the real cause rests in the miasm. So when I speak of gout I do not mean the name of a disease, but a class of manifestations that are met in large cities especially, less frequently in the country where the people live on farms and take plenty of exercise and have wholesome food and are not housed up. It is supposed to be due to wine drinking. Often when I say to patients that the symptoms are somewhat gouty, they reply, "I am not in the habit of drinking wine. I have not been a high liver." Such conditions of course bring on a tendency to gout.
Painful soreness in the eyeballs like Bryonia and Gelsemium. The eyeballs are very sensitive to touch and sore to pressure; feel as if he had been struck a blow in the eye; sore, bruised, pain in the eye. Coryza with aching in every bone.
With the bilious attacks there often may be an ending in a diarrhoea ; copious green discharges, green fluid or semi-fluid stools, but after the attack has lingered until there is one grand emptying out of the bowels, this symptom will disappear and the secondary state comes on in which there is constipation and a light-colored stool, or bileless stool.
Boneset has a dry, hacking, teasing cough, that seems to rack the whole frame, as if it would break him up, it is so sore, and he is so much disturbed by motion. A great amount of tribulation is found in the respiratory tract, in the bronchial tubes. We find a cough in capillary bronchitis that shakes the whole frame, analogous to Bryonia and Phosphorus. The subject is extremely sensitive to the cold air, as much so as in Nui vomica. Nux vomica has aching in the bones as if they would break; he wants the room hot, and wants to be covered with clothing which relieves; often the slightest lifting of the covers increases the chilliness, which is true also of Eupatorium, so they run close together. In Nux vomica we have the dreadful irritability of temper; in Eupatorium we have overwhelming sadness. The Nux vomica patient is not likely to say much about dying, he is too irritable to go into the next world; not so with Eupatorium, he is full of sadness.
There are other states that come on secondarily in this medicine after malarial attacks and in gouty affections, etc., there is bloating of the lower limbs, oedematous swelling. It is not an uncommon thing for a malarial fever that has lingered a long time to be attended with swelling of the lower limbs. Eupatorium very strongly competes with Natrum muriaticum, China and Arsenicum in such lingering malaria. When the symptoms have largely subsided and left only this state of anaemia and dropsy of the lower extremities, in the badly treated cases, it is very difficult to find what medicine to administer, and the course that the homoeopath must pursue is to go back and examine the patient to find the symptoms he had at the time of the intermittent fever, before he was meddled with. If now there is swelling of the extremities, and you get symptoms to show you that he needed Eupatorium in the beginning, Eupatorium will still cure the dropsy of the extremities. It may bring back the chill, it may bring back an orderly state that you can prescribe on. If in the beginning he needed Arsenicum, that remedy will bring back the chill, turn it right end to and cure his symptoms. The trouble is that the symptoms were only suppressed, had not been cured. So the medicine he needed, but has never had for the chill, may be the medicine that he needs now. Then think of Eupatorium in dropsical swellings of the feet and ankles, and in gouty swellings also. The gouty swellings are all of an inflammatory character. Very commonly these arc closely related to hydrarthrosis, and here Eupatorium is to be compared with Arsenicum. Gouty inflammation of the knee. All the way through this remedy you read about bone-aches and bone-pains.
It is peculiar that medicines come around on time with an exactitude. Diseases do the same thing, and we must see that it is also peculiar that they come with a regular cycle, a regular periodicity. We meet with headaches that come every seven days, headaches also that come once in two weeks, and there are remedies that have seven-day aggravations and fourteen-day aggravations and three-day aggravations, remedies that bring out their symptoms just in this form. Do not be surprised when your patient is perfectly under the influence of Aurum if he has a characteristic aggravation every twenty-one days. There are quite a number of remedies having fourteen-day aggravations, e. g., China and Arsenicum. Again, there are autumnal aggravations, spring aggravations, winter aggravations, aggravations from cold weather and aggravations in the summer from heat. Some remedies have both the latter.
EUPHRASIA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Euphrasia is a short acting remedy of great usefulness in acute catarrhal affections with or without fever. Headaches that occur with coryza and eye symptoms, head aches in the evening as if bruised. Stitching pain in the head. Headaches as if the head would burst with dazzling of the eyes from sun-light. These are catarrhal headaches with profuse watery discharge from the eyes and nose. The eye symptoms of Euphrasia are its most prominent feature. Catarrhal condition of the eyes with copious, acrid, watery discharge with or without coryza. Cutting pain in the eyes extending into the head, pressure in the eyes as if caused by sand. Sensation of dryness, burning, biting in the eyes. Sensation of dust in the eyes.
Violent itching of the eyes obliging rubbing and winking, with copious lachrymation. Pupils much contracted and much tumefaction of the mucous membrane with redness and enlarged blood vessels and smarting. Iritis from rheumatism or in connection with rheumatic joints.
Copious thin or thick discharges. General inflammation of all the tissues of the eyes. Ulceration of the cornea. It has cured Pannus. Pustular inflammation. Opacity of the cornea after injuries of the eye. It is suitable in the most violent acute conjunctivitis. Amblyopia with inflammation of conjunctiva and lids. Copious lachrymation and burning. The mucous membranes of the lids and eyeballs are injected, red, and vascular. Glutination of the lids in the morning. Copious, acrid lachrymation with fluent discharge from the nose during coryza. Dryness of the lids and the margins of the lids red, swollen, and burning. The lids are very sensitive and swollen. The margins of the lids itch and burn. Suppuration of the margins of the lids. Much swelling of the lids with inflammation. Fine rash about the eyes with puffiness of the lids. Blurred vision. Paralysis of the third nerve.
The next most important group of symptoms is in connection with the nose. Sneezing and fluent coryza. The discharge is bland and this occurs with acrid lachrymation. The nasal mucous membrane is swollen. Profuse, bland, fluent coryza. After this coryza has existed for a day or two it extends into the larynx with a hard cough.
The coryza is worse during the night while lying down. The cough is worse in the daytime and ameliorated by lying down. The remedy has a rash like measles and it has febrile symptoms; therefore, when these symptoms are duly considered, it will be seen that Euphrasia is similar to the symptoms that occur in measles. It is a wonderful medicine in measles though not so frequently indicated as Pulsatilla owing to the fact that this combination of symptoms does not often come. Hoarseness in the morning. Irritation in the larynx compelling him to cough, followed by pressure beneath the sternum. Abundant secretion in the larynx causing loose cough with rattling in the chest. Deep inspiration is difficult. The cough, considered by itself, furnishes a very rare group of symptoms. Cough with copious expectoration along with or following coryza. Difficult respiration ameliorated at night while lying down, worse in the morning when moving about with copious expectoration. Violent cough from tickling in the larynx. No cough at night causes the remedy to resemble Bry. and Mang. The dyspnoea and cough are ameliorated by lying down. The coryza symptoms, otherwise, are worse at night and from lying down. When these symptoms occur in grippe or influenza, this becomes a very suitable remedy. The abundance of mucus scraped from the larynx and trachea is often like the ending of bad colds. The expectoration is easy and almost without cough. It comes up without much effort. Pressive pain beneath the sternum showing that the trachea is especially involved in the catarrhal condition. The pain in the eyes is worse in the open air. The coryza is worse in the open air. The cough sometimes comes on in the open air. Windy weather causes fluent coryza. Cold air and windy weather cause lachrymation. He is a chilly patient and cannot get warm in bed. There is chill, fever, and sweat in this remedy. The chill predominates. The fever occurs mostly during the day with red face and cold hands. The heat descends the body. The perspiration is often confined to the front part of the body. Perspiration during sleep at night. Strange odor sometimes very offensive and most profuse upon the chest. It is especially suitable in catarrhal fever, influenza and measles. When the symptoms agree, it will make a violent attack of measles turn into .a very simple form, making the patient feel better, bring out the eruption, control the fever, and relieve the cough, coryza, and other catarrhal symptoms. Streaming, hot, burning tears with rash, photophobia, running from the nose, intense throbbing headaches, redness of the eyes, photophobia from fever, dry cough during measles.
FLUORIC ACID
It takes a long time for this remedy, in the proving, to develop its symptoms. It is a very deep-acting medicine, and an antipsoric, anti-syphilitic and anti-sycotic. It is insidious in its action and its symptoms are slow in approach; it is like the deepest and slowest and most tedious diseases, the miasms, and hence it is suitable in the very slowest and lowest forms of disease. While it has in its nature some febrile action, it is not for this purpose that it is oftenest called for; its most typical febrile action is very slow and insidious. It corresponds to overheated states of the system, old cases of nightly fevers, coming on week after week and year after year.
It is an unusually hot-blooded remedy at times, and again it has conditions of coldness. In the evening and night great heat seems to evolve from the body without increase of temperature. The skin becomes very hot. The patient is often < from warm things, < from covering, < from warm air; suffocates somewhat like Puls. in a warm room. He wants to bathe the face and head in cold water; such bathing is grateful. The feet burn and are put out of bed in the night; he hunts around in bed for a cool place for the feet and hands. The soles perspire, and the palms perspire, and the sweat is acrid, making the parts sore; excoriation from the sweat between the toes. The perspiration is offensive; offensive, acrid sweat between the toes. Burning, unusual heat and acridity are words that modify a great many symptoms; an acrid lachrymation or other discharge from the eye; acrid discharge from the nose, acrid sweat, etc. Sensation of burning and burning pains in parts; heat evolved from the body as a chronic state. Aggravation from heat, from outward heat and from inward heat, belongs to this remedy. It is a strong feature of this remedy to be worse from drinking tea and coffee. Warm drinks bring on a diarrhoea, or flatulence, or disturbance in the stomach, and cause indigestion to manifest itself in various ways. The symptoms are worse standing and sitting and better in the open air.
It is a remedy of great depth of action. It so disturbs the functions that there are peculiar outward signs in the nails, in the hair, in the skin; they are all imperfectly developed. Whenever such is the case, we know that a remedy has great depth of action and that it is very long acting. It forms little incrustations here and there upon the skin that seem to have no tendency to heal. A crust forms, but there seems to be no healing beneath the crust. The hair loses its lustre; it falls out, and if examined closely under the microscope it is seen to be necrosed; little ragged ulcers will be found along the course of the hair. The ends of the hair are dry, the hair mats and splits and breaks, becomes ragged in masses and lustreless. The nails are crippled, lengthwise corrugations in the nails; the nails grow too fast and grow awkwardly; that is, they are deformed and crippled, too thick in some places, and too thin in others ; break easily, brittle. There is a tendency to breaking down of a slow character, where the circulation is very feeble, and the skin is near bone or cartilage, as in the cartilages in the ears, and in the cartilages of joints. Ulcers develop over the tibia. There is feeble circulation in the hands and feet, and they become cold. In the evening the extremities burn and are feverish, because that is the time of the feverish state; but in the morning and in the daytime there is coldness of the extremities. The patient is pallid and sickly, and at times becomes waxy and dropsical; oedema of the extremities, and particularly of the lower extremities; oedema of certain parts; oedema of the prepuce. When a debilitated subject, one suffering from bone and cartilaginous troubles, contracts gonorrhoea, with it he will have enormous swelling of the prepuce, and nothing seems to act upon it. Fluoric acid will cure oedema of the prepuce with gonorrhoea in such a subject. Cannabis sativa has the same symptom, but it is especially useful in robust cases. Fluoric acid will prevent the manifestation of disease in sycotic subjects, will prevent formation of fig warts. It cures fig warts. It produces hardened, dry warts, and dry crusts upon the skin, and crusts not unlike rupia. It is useful in syphilitic rupia.
Bone affections stand out prominently. Necrosis, especially of the long bones, but also of the bones of the ear. It creates an offensive, acrid discharge from the ear. It establishes an offensive ozaena, an acrid discharge, with necrosis of the nasal bones. It is very analogous to Sil., and it is one of the natural followers of Sil. where Sil. has been too frequently repeated by persons who do not- know that Silicea does its best work in a single dose and that it is a long acting and slow medicine. It not only antidotes the abuse of Sil., but also follows Sil. After practicing a while you will be surprised to observe the pendulum-like action between heat and cold in various complementary remedies. To make that clear I will illustrate it by using the series in which this remedy is set and to which it naturally belongs. You take a patient who is hot-blooded, who is always suffering from the heat, from too much clothing and too warm a room especially in the evenings, a patient that is tearful and sad, and may be a blonde. Why you say, I am trying to describe a Pulsatilla patient. Well, yes; anyone can see that. Puls. is a hot-blooded patient, but after using that remedy a while you notice that the patient goes to the other extreme and becomes chilly, and wants much clothing; the heat is taken out of the case. Sil. is the natural follower of Puls., and you would be astonished to know how often a patient leaving Puls. runs toward Sil. Sil. goes deeper into the case, it does more curing, and it is the natural chronic of Puls. Other remedies of course follow Puls., but Sid. more frequently than any other medicine. Now, that is the second step; the patient has gone from a warm to a cool state ; the overheated state has been lost and he has gone into Sil., but when Sil. has been administered for a while it cures the cold state, and removes the chilliness of the patient (remember, however, that Sil. has at times something of Puls. in it; in some of its complaints it is < from being overheated) and the patient under Sil. goes back to the warm state again, becomes hot-blooded, wants the warm covers thrown off, wants to be lightly covered. Then it is that this medicine comes in the series.
Fluor. ac. follows Sil. as naturally as Sil. follows Puls. They exist in threes. There are other remedies that exist in threes, but the most common ones you will think of will be Sulph., Calc., and Lyc., Sulph., Sars., and Sep., and Coloc., Caust. and Staph., which often follow each other and rotate in this way. Do not let these facts make you give a routine remedy unless the symptoms agree, but it does help to remember that remedies are somewhat similar. It is true that Puls., Sil. and Fluor. ac. are similar all along the line as to the nature of their symptoms. Puls. corresponds to more acute disturbances, or to the earlier stages of chronic disease, the more active or violent operations of chronic disease. It will take off the wire edge of the disease, and it will be followed by some medicine that is complementary to it, always to be determined by the symptoms that arise. There are cases that would be greatly injured by so deeply acting a remedy as Sid. if given in the beginning, that is, the suffering would be unnecessary; but if you commence with Puls. you can mitigate the case and prepare it to receive Sit., providing the two would appear to be on a plane of agreement. A very serious case had better first receive Puls., and the way being paved by that remedy follow it up with Sil.
Think of this remedy, then, in vicious bone diseases, in necrosis and caries, is fistulous openings, fistula leading to the teeth, fistula lachrymalis and fistula in ano; in calcareous degeneration; in deformity of the nails, hair and teeth; in affections of the thigh bones and leg bones, with chronic fistulous openings leading to bone discharging pus which excoriates the parts all around.
The patient is over-sensitive; is made worse if the bowels do not move regularly; is distressed if the menstrual flow is slightly delayed; suffers if the call to urinate cannot be immediately attended to, hence, as in the text, "headaches > by micturition." That symptom is all that is given in the text; but remember something that is analogous to it, viz.: If the call to urinate be not attended to the headache will continue to grow < until the urine is voided. That is a peculiar symptom, and it sometimes leads to the study of Fluor. ac. Violent congestive headache with heat and fullness. Violent occipital headache, worse from motion.
Now, if we take into consideration its great depth of action, we will see furthermore that it is suitable in some brain diseases. In persons who have overworked, who have been working day and night to establish a business, or to keep it up, and when there has been constant use of the brain it is suitable. In mental depression and melancholy, with great sadness, in young men who have destroyed the nervous system by vicious practices, by secret vice. It is particularly suitable for that disorder of the human economy where men have continuously changed their mistresses. There is a state in which a man is never satisfied with one woman, but he continually changes and goes from bad to worse until he is a debauchee. If a young man cannot keep away from women, he is not so bad off if he will only keep to one, but he goes from one to many, until he stands upon the street corners and, in his lust, craves the innocent women that go along the street. Fluoric acid is suitable in that state, like Picric acid and Sepia, and these medicines are particularly suited to that condition of enfeeblement of the mind and that disorder of the human economy that makes man so low, that we have the state described as "low mindedness." It takes that form in one who is a sort of debauchee, running after all sorts of things to tickle his fancy, but it takes another form in a man who stays at home with his good wife. He takes an aversion to his children and to his dearest friends and his wife, that is, he has lost that true and noble and orderly affection and friendship and companionship which ought to exist, and he fights against it. An orderly man considers his wife his best friend and he would rather stay with her than go anywhere else. To him there is no place like home. Now, when man arrives at the state when he wants to go somewhere else, that he wants to go away from home, that he is disturbed at home, that everything annoys him at home, that he no longer loves his children as he once did, he needs Fluoric acid. "Feeling of indifference towards those he loves best." The Sepia state is like this, but Sep. is more frequently-indicated in women. The woman will say, "Doctor, there is one thing that I regret very much, and that is, I do not seem to enjoy my children, my home, my companions, my husband and my friends. There is a sort of alienation" Such is the way it is told where it is Sepia. In the matt it is more commonly Fluoric acid, in the woman more commonly Sep., but this need not necessarily be so. Sepia corresponds more closely to the condition of the uterus and ovaries, and such conditions, as the woman alone can have. (Compare Calcarea.)
Fluoric acid has with this state an overwhelming sexual erethism. He is kept awake nights by erections. This state of desire forces itself upon him, not only when he is with the opposite sex, but at all times. At times, in the beginning of a gonorrhoea, this condition of priapism and intense uncontrollable sexual desire, with swelling of the foreskin, is overcome by Fluoric acid. There are times when this priapism demands Canth., but that remedy differs wholly in its nature from this.
Reticence and silence; sitting and saying nothing. This reticence is like Puls., and often belongs to the insane who will sit in the corner and say nothing all day, never uttering one single word, and hardly answering when spoken to. A patient sits in the corner and says nothing and does nothing, eats when food is offered, is led to her room when the time comes, resists nobody, answers nothing; such a state is found in Pulsatilla, and is closely allied to this remedy. There is some insanity in it, but especially the fatigue and mildness of a tired brain. Mental exhaustion from overwork or from vices.
It is suitable after Sil. in the spinal affections that are attended with paralysis, trembling and numbness in the soles of the feet. It will often stop the progress of structural nervous diseases and prevent the case from getting worse.
An excellent and very useful feature of this remedy is its ability to produce varicose veins and varicose ulcers. The veins become varicosed anywhere, but particularly upon the lower limbs, especially following pregnancy. Haemorrhoids protrude after a stool; the anus and rectum protrude, and there is some bleeding, because of the haemorrhoidal condition. Varicose conditions with very old ulcers upon the lower extremities; the varicose veins ulcerate. You might predict what kind of ulcer and what kind of a margin Fluoric acid would produce. We see the feebleness of its circulation, we see its tendency to create hard crusts, and hardened, horny skin and eruptions. We might now easily assume that the inflamed borders of an ulcer would become indurated, hard and glassy. The margins of ulcers are indurated and the ulcer is an old, indolent ulcer. Parts of once broken will not close up. Union will not take place between the broken ends of bones, there is no repair. From bones and from ulcers, we have the foetid, acrid, thin, watery discharges, or at times very scanty discharges, but acrid, burning the parts all around, raising eruptions and scurfs around the ulcers.
From the feebleness of the circulation one might suppose that numbness would naturally be present, and it is true. The ears become numb, the scalp becomes numb, there is a sensation as if the back of the head were made of wood. The scalp loses its sensation, the hair falls out and crusts form. The extremities become numb and there is numbness of the feet and hands extending upwards; numbness, with or without dropsy; numbness in spinal affections; numbness in brain diseases. Numbness of the limb not laid on.
"Crusta lactea; dry scales; itches very much, bald places. Caries of the temporal bone; discharges offensive smelling pus periodically." "Whole left side of the head retarded in growth, left eye seems smaller." That is a clinical state, but it is significant.
Its use in syphilis must not be overlooked. In old cases with exostoses, caries and necrosis, cases that have been mercurialized, and treated by other drugs until ulcers have developed or those affections of the nose that we have often observed in syphilitic states. He blows small pieces of bone out of the nose; great pain in the nose; nasal bones all destroyed, and the nose becomes flat as though only a soft piece of flesh with perforations. The uvula is eaten off and the tonsils become honeycombed by syphilitic ulcers. Lingering, low forms of ulcers and eruptions. The teeth decay or break off or ulcerate at the roots; fistulous openings from the root of the tooth, continuing to discharge. Many a time has this remedy taken away that ulcer of the root, closed up that fistulous opening, cured the pain, saved the tooth.
"Craves cold water and is continually hungry." Often that "all gone" sensation in the stomach. Is always eating and is relieved from eating, but like Iodine it does not last long, for soon he becomes hungry again. Such medicines are very deep. We see that they go to the very root of assimilation and nutrition.
Chronic ulcers of the throat not necessarily syphilitic, but it is particularly useful in the old forms of syphilis; not generally so suitable in the earlier ulcers as in those that are associated with the tertiary forms, with debilitated states, with brain disease, with nervous symptoms that go on for years when the patient is supposed to be cured. Very often the trouble will come back in the throat, and the ulcers consist of little gummatous growths. Sil. especially covers such a condition, and Sil. is also one of the most useful medicines for rooting out Mercury. In potentized form Sil. and Merc. are inimical, yet the high potencies of Sil. will antidote crude Mercury.
This patient craves pungent, spicy, highly seasoned things. The appetite must be tickled; there must be some inducement to eat. At times the appetite is changeable in spite of the fact that he is overwhelmingly hungry; he cannot eat, yet he is > when the food is in the stomach, > after eating.
The most vicious kind of chronic diarrhoea with this low feeble constitution, in insidious complaints. "Morning diarrhoea." The itching of the anus is sometimes intense; protrusion of the anus during defecation; profuse haemorrhage after stool; constipation with piles; itching around and in anus, in perineum, etc.
This drug is also suitable in the dropsy of drunkards. They are very often liver dropsies. Old cicatrices become red around the edges, surrounded by itching vesicles, itching violently; squamous eruptions upon the body ; dry, cutaneous eruptions upon the body, very scaly.
"Sensation as if a burning vapor were emitted from the pores of the body." Especially under the covers there is this sensation of great heat, tremendous, like steam. It is not in fever. He has no fever, but it is a chronic state of giving out heat without thirst, or increase of temperature.
GELSEMIUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
If you will observe the weather conditions in sharp climates, -such as Minnesota, Massachusetts and Canada, you will find that the cold spells are very intense and that people, when exposed, come down with complaints very rapidly and violently. That is the way the Bell. and Acon. cases come on, but Gelsemium complaints do not come from such causes nor appear that way. Its complaints are more insidious and come on with a degree of slowness. A Gels. cold develops its symptoms several days after the exposure, while the Acon. cold comes on a few hours after exposure. The Aconite child exposed during the day in dry, cold weather will have croup before midnight. But in the South diseases are very slow. Like the people themselves, their organs are very slow, and their reaction is slow. Their colds are not taken from the violent cold, but from getting overheated. Hence, they take colds and fevers of a low, malarial type; they have congestive headaches and congestive complaints that do not come on suddenly. When we think of the climate, and consider the people, and the pace of remedies, we see that Gels. is a remedy for warm climates, while Acon. is a remedy for colder climates. Certain acute complaints in the North will be like Aconite, while similar complaints will have symptoms in the warmer climate like Gels. The colds and fevers of the mild winters will be more likely to run to this medicine, whereas the colds and fevers of a violent winter will be more likely to run to Bell. and Acon. It is true that Acon. has complaints in hot weather, fevers and dysentery of hot weather, but they are different from the complaints of winter.
Gels. has been used mostly in acute troubles. In lingering acute troubles and in those resembling the chronic it is very useful, but in chronic miasms it is not the remedy. It is only a short-acting remedy, though slow in its beginning. In this it is like Bryonia. Bry. complaints come on slowly, and hence it is suitable for fevers coming on in the southern climates, but it also has sudden violent complaints, though not to the extent we find in Bell.
The complaints of Gels. are largely congestive. Cerebral hyperaemia, determination of blood to the brain and to the spinal cord. The extremities become cold and the head and back become hot. The symptoms are manifested largely through the brain and spinal cord. In connection with brain affections there are convulsions of the extremities, crampings of the fingers and toes and of the muscles of the back. Coldness of the fingers and toes; sometimes the extremities are icy cold to the knees, while the head is hot and the face purple. During the congestion the face is purple and mottled. The eyes are engorged, the pupils dilated (sometimes contracted), the eyes are in a state of marked congestion with lachrymation and twitching. The patient feels dazed and talks as if he were delirious; incoherent, stupid, forgetful. It is like this in intermittent fever that gradually develops towards a congestive chill. Great coldness running up the back from the lower part of the spine to the back of the head. Shuddering, as if ice were rubbed up the back. The pains also extend up the back. With the coldness of the extremities, the very dark red countenance, the dazed condition of mind, the glassy eyes and dilated pupils, we have the neck drawn back and rigidity of the muscles of the back of the neck, so that the neck cannot be straightened, and there are violent pains up the back and coldness in the spine. This state would remind one of cerebro-spinal meningitis. Pain in the base of the brain and in the back of the neck. With all states there is a very hot skin and a high temperature, with coldness of the extremities.
Sometimes the troubles are ushered in with a violent chill. This is a very important remedy to study when such symptoms are present in intermittents and in a few days the tongue begins to coat, nausea comes on, ending in vomiting of bile, and instead of there being an intermission a continued fever extends from one paroxysm into another, with a higher temperature in the afternoon. The chill practically subsides, leaving a state which has the appearance of typhoid, with dry tongue, not much thirst and marked head symptoms, dazed in mind. If this continues many days delirium and all the features of typhoid will come on and the fever will change its type altogether from the intermittent to the continued. In congestive chill with high temperature occurring in the afternoon, the chill part of it subsiding and the fever becoming continued, Gels. is a useful remedy. It is also a very important remedy in afternoon fevers without chill in infants and in children. You will find in malarial districts that it is a common thing for the infants to have remittent attacks, while the adults are having intermittents. It is only occasionally that you will see a child or infant shake with a distinct chill, but they often go into a remittent fever, an afternoon fever which will subside along towards morning, to be followed the next afternoon by fever. With Gels. the child will lie as still as in Bry. but there is more congestion to the head; there is the dark red face and duskiness like Bry.
Running through the febrile complaints, in the spinal meningitis, in congestion of the brain, in intermittents or remittents that change to a continued fever, and even in a cold when the patient is sneezing and has hot face and red eyes, there is one grand feature, viz., a feeling of great weight and tiredness in the entire body and limbs. The head cannot be lifted from the pillow, so tired and so heavy is it, and there is such a great weight in the limbs. The Bry. patient lies quietly because if he moves the pains are worse. He has an aversion to motion, because he is conscious that it would cause an increase of suffering.
The heart is feeble and the pulse is feeble, soft and irregular. There is palpitation during the febrile state. Palpitation, with weakness and irregularity of the pulse. There is a sense of weakness and goneness in the region of the heart, and this weakness and goneness often extend into the stomach, involving the whole lower part of the left side of the chest and across the stomach, creating a sensation of hunger, like Ignatia and Sepia. There is a hysterical element running through Gels. and it has the nervous hunger, or gnawing.
There are cardiac nervous affections like Digitalis, Cactus and Sepia. Sepia is not known to be as great a heart remedy as Cactus, but it has cured many cases of heart troubles. Sepia has cured endocarditis, and a remedy that will take hold in endocarditis and root it out must be a deep acting remedy. He feels that if he ceases to move the heart will cease to beat.
The headaches are of the congestive type. The most violent pain is in the occiput, and it is felt sometimes as a hammering. Every pulsation is felt like the blow of a hammer in the base of the skull. These headaches are so violent that the patient cannot stand up, but will lie perfectly exhausted, as if paralyzed from the pain. There is an occipital headache that compels walking or rolling the head. There is commonly relief from lying in bed, bolstered up by pillows, with the head perfectly quiet. The face is flushed and dusky and the patient is dazed. After the headache progresses a while, the whole head seems to enter into a state of congestion, there is one grand pain, too dreadful to describe, and the patient loses his ability to tell symptoms and appears dazed ; lies bolstered up in bed, eyes glassy, pupils dilated, face mottled, and extremities cold. Gels. has also headaches of a neuralgic character in the temples and over the eyes, with nausea and aggravation from vomiting. The headache is relieved by passing a copious quantity of urine; that is, the urine which has probably been scanty becomes free and then the headache subsides.
There is much nervous excitement. Complaints from fear, from embarrassment, from shock that is attended with fear, from sudden surprises that are attended with fright. A soldier going into battle has an involuntary stool; involuntary discharges from fright and surprises accompanying fright. On becoming suddenly overwhelmed by some surprise he becomes faint, weak and exhausted, he becomes tired in all the limbs and unable to resist opposing circumstances. His heart palpitates. This is similar to Arg. nit. Arg. nit. has the peculiar condition that when dressing for an opera a sudden attack of diarrhoea comes on, causing more or less sudden exhaustion, and she must go several times before she can finish dressing. They who are to appear before an audience are detained because of a sudden attack of diarrhoea. A lady has an attack of diarrhoea when about to meet friends over whom she expects to become excited at the meeting. The anticipation brings on the diarrhoea. Such a state is. Arg. nit. These medicines are so closely related to each other that there are times when they will appear to do the work of each other.
Then we have paralytic affections of the sphincters, and so with the febrile conditions there is involuntary loss of stool and urine. There is also paralytic weakness of the extremities and of the hands. With paralytic states there is aching along the spine and in the muscles of the back; drawing, cramping in the muscles of the back and aching under the left shoulder blade.
There are many disturbances of vision; double vision, dimness of vision, appearance as of gauze before the eyes; confusion of vision and blindness. These symptoms come on before going into attacks, in connection with chill, at the coming on of sick headaches and congestive headaches.
All sorts of objects are seen; the field of vision appears full of black specks, or full of smoke or little waves of various colors. It is useful in inflammation of all the tissues of the eye and of the eyelids. The eyeballs oscillate laterally when using them. Drooping of the eyelids or ptosis is a marked feature and is in its paralytic nature. The muscles are relaxed, they do not hold the lids up. The lids close when he is looking steadily; they simply fall down over the eyes.
The patient in general is thirstless, and it is the exception that there is much thirst. It has a profuse, exhaustive sweat and is aggravated from motion, or rather motion seems to be impossible. It seems that he is unable to move, that he is too weak to move, and this runs through all complaints. At times it is a remedy for coryza, with sneezing and running of water from the nose, with coldness in the extremities, and the trouble will go down into the throat and produce sore throat, with redness, tumefaction, enlargement of the tonsils, hot head and congested face. With this, as with the other febrile conditions, there is heaviness of the extremities. The red face, the heaviness of the extremities and sore throat that has come on gradually, a little worse from day to day, until it has become a severe throat, will lead you to Gels., especially if there is paralytic weakness all over, and as the throat trouble progresses the food and drink come back through the nose. This is due to a paralysis of the muscles of deglutition. The tongue also becomes paralyzed and does not perform its work in an orderly way. There are times when the paralytic weakness is not sufficiently marked to account for things seen, but there is an incoordination of muscles and he is awkward. He undertakes to take hold of an article and takes hold of something else. When he does grasp his hands feel weak. He is awkward and clumsy and the muscles do this and that and something not ordered to do. The trembling, incoordination and paresis are especially noticed during high excitement and afterwards, and these states occur with the febrile condition and remain sometimes after. Useful in paralytic cases that begin with fevers. Tearing is felt in the nerves all over the body and seems to be due to an inflammatory condition. It has cured sciatica, with tearing pains, associated with great weakness of the limbs. Loss of sensation is sometimes found; numbness of the end of the nose, of the ears, of the tongue, of the fingers, of the hands and feet, numb ness, here and there, of the skin.
In the male, the sexual organs are in the same condition as the patient in general. The semen dribbles away; there is impotency, no ability to perform the sexual act; the sexual organs are relaxed.
The sleep is greatly disturbed. He cannot go to sleep; every excitement keeps him awake. During marked febrile conditions he has a profound sleep or coma. When he is not in this comatose sleep during congestion he is in a state of nervous excitement in which he lies awake thinking, and yet thinks of nothing in particular, because his mind will not work in an orderly way.
The symptoms of Gels. may be present in inflammation of any organ, uterus or ovaries, stomach, the lungs and of the rectum. It has congestion of organs, but it has also high grade inflammation. There is nothing peculiar in the inflammation itself that would indicate Gels., neither should Gels. ever be given because there is inflammation, but when the mental symptoms are present, the delirium, the flushed face, the determination of blood to the head with the cold extremities, the great heaviness of the limbs, the disturbance of sensation, the paralysis of sphincters, then Gels. would be good for inflammation of any organ of the body. In a most distressing and violent, rapidly spreading erysipelas that seems destined to cause death in a few days all the symptoms point to Gels., and though Gels. may not have produced erysipelas it will stop the progress of the disease in a few hours and the patient will go on to a quick recovery. Many times when erysipelas has spread over the face and scalp in the most dangerous manner with the dusky red color that belongs to Gels., and other symptoms such as I have described in a general way, Gels. has taken hold of the erysipelas and cured. If we master thoroughly the Materia Medica we do not stop to see if a remedy produces certain kinds of inflammation, etc., but we consider the state of the patient.
GLONOINUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
The most common feature in this remedy is the surging of blood to the head and to the heart. A patient often describes the state as a feeling as if all the blood in the body must be rushing around the heart, with a sense of heat or a boiling sensation in the region of the heart, or in the left side of the chest. Again he complains of a surging in the head, a warm glowing sensation in the head or a feeling of intense glowing from the stomach or from the chest up into the head, attended at times with loss of consciousness. There are also wave-like sensations in the head, as if the skull were being lifted up and lowered, or as if it were being expanded and contracted. Along with this there is most intense pain, sometimes as if the head would burst, sometimes great soreness in the head, or a sense of soreness felt in the skull. Another accompaniment of the surging is great throbbing, synchronous with the beat of the heart, and when the skull has this soreness then the throbbing is like the beating of hammers, and every pulsation is painful, so that there are painful pulsations and sometimes painless pulsations. The pulsations are tremendous, and when they are greatest in the head they are felt also in the extremities. The fingers and toes pulsate, there is pulsation throughout the back, and it seems that the whole body throbs. If this continues a while the soreness in the skull is likely to come on and with it the painful throbbing, every throb is a pain. In this state, with every jar in stepping, and every motion, it seems as if the head would be crushed. The throbbing becomes more painful from motion. The vomiting which attends this condition relieves.
The head is relieved in the open air, it is worse in the warmth, and is often relieved from the application of cold. It is made worse by lying down, or lying with the head low. In the extremities we have great coldness. The extremities cold, pale and perspiring, the head hot and the face flushed and purple or bright red. The pupils are dilated and the eyes red. Now, if this progresses only a little while, the tongue becomes dry, red and then brown. There is no great thirst, but the mouth is very dry. The eyelids become dry and stick to the eyeballs. At times the skin becomes dry and hot, and the face is red and glistens. All degrees of confusion of mind, even loss of consciousness, will be present.
Have I not described to a great extent that which is seen in a typical sunstroke? It is noticeable also that Glonoine symptoms are worse in the heat of summer and relieved in winter. The dull headaches and the continuous headaches are aggravated from warm weather and ameliorated from cold. They are worse in the sun and better in the shade. All sorts of contrivances will be resorted to by Glonoine patients to keep the sun's heat from the head. When he has had these troubles for years, and it has become a chronic state, he will never go out in the warmth of the sun without an umbrella.
Glonoine corresponds to congestive states in the head that come on suddenly, especially from heat, but also from gaslight, or from any bright light. The headaches that book-keepers are subject to, especially in those that have at their desk, or over the head, a hot gaslight. The bright light accompanied by the heat so close to the head will make this individual subject to headaches. These headaches are relieved by going into the cold air. The headaches all day when he is at his books, and when he goes home at night and lies down the headache comes on again, and lie has to be bolstered up in bed. He wants the head high, and cold applications to the head; the headache is reIieved from a long sleep, not generally relieved from siesta. From lying down and taking a nap the headache is sometimes aggravated, but from a good long sleep, a night's sleep, he is refreshed. His feet and hands become warm, the feverish state, and the throbbing all over the body subside and he wakes up in the morning comfortable; but if he goes out in the sun, or goes to the gaslight, he comes home with the headache again. Since electric lights have been brought into use there is not so much heat in the light, but gas throws out an immense amount of heat in its light.
The child comes down with cerebro-spinal meningitis, the neck is drawn back, the face is intensely hot, red and shiny, the eyes congested or glassy, the head and upper part of the body are very warm, the feet and hands and lower portions of the body and the extremities are cold and covered with cold sweat. It is a most violent congestion to the brain and spinal cord. Convulsions come on, convulsions throughout all the limbs, the neck and whole body drawn back, opisthotonos. Cold feels good to the head; heat feels good to the extremities. The warm room increases the convulsions. When the lower limbs are covered with clothing in a cool room and the windows open the convulsions are relieved and the patient breathes more easily. With this head congestion there is difficulty in breathing and audible palpitation.
The head is made worse from shaking or jar, from stooping, from bending head backwards, after lying down, when ascending steps. It is aggravated in damp weather, and in the sun, while working under the gaslight, after overheating with copious sweat, and from the touch of the hat. The weight of the hat is a very common aggravation in headaches in school children. The little ones work all day in a hot stuffy room and feel better in the open air, but the weight of the hat seems an encumbrance as in Nitric acid and Calc. phos.
The Glonoine patient is also worse from wine and from stimulants, and from mental application. When the headache is on he cannot think, and he cannot write. An additional hindrance to writing is that he trembles so that he cannot write. Trembling and throbbing of the fingers so that he is unable to do his work or perform any delicate work with the fingers or hands.
We have puerperal convulsions with such an appearance as I have described. We may have the same violence in congestive chills, or in any type of congestion of the brain.
There is a milder form of trouble that calls for its use, a condition corresponding to the chronic types of disease. This milder form exists where the patient has simply what might be called a hyperaemia of the brain, a rush of blood to the head when able to be about. It comes in spells, comes in moments when he least expects it; while walking on the street he feels a surging to the brain like a flush of heat and a flush on the face, his hands tremble, and the hands and feet become cold, he breaks out in a sweat; he looks around him and does not know which way to go home, he does not know where his dwelling is. He looks in the faces of friends and they seem strange, he loses his way when he is near home. It is a confusion which soon passes away, and he feels better again. But these spells come closer together, and constitute the earlier stages of softening of the brain. This surging of blood to the brain is attended with dizziness; he rolls and staggers, and must take hold of things, and especially does he suffer in this way from a warm day, or from the heat and light of the sun.
In threatened apoplexy, and when apoplexy has taken place, if the violent pressure keeps on, think of this remedy. The clot may not be at first in the place to take life, it may be outside of the life line, but if the congestion continues that blood clot will increase. Such medicines as Opium and Glonoine relieve the blood pressure when the symptoms agree. They equalize the circulation, and the patient may not die. A paralytic condition in one arm or leg may go on for a while, and at the end of many weeks or months the motion may be regained, and the patient recover; whereas if the suitable remedy had not been administered to reduce that blood pressure the continued congestion would certainly have ended in death in a few days. The stertorous breathing, the coma, the history, and the general appearance of an apoplectic patient are found in this remedy, but the intense heat that comes on in many cases of apoplexy along with the shiny skin and coldness of the extremities are the guiding features. Opium is the most frequently indicated medicine, but it must not be administered in large doses. The highest potencies are the best and one single dose is enough.
In a case noted it says, "frantic attempts to jump from the window." The headache was so intense that the patient became violent and attempted to jump from the window. You may rest assured that with his headache there was all this determination of blood to the head. It is enough to make one frantic to feel this continued hammering upon every fraction of the skull. He cannot lie down, and he cannot walk, because every step increases the jar, so- you see why it is that the word "frantic" is used there. The patient becomes frantic with the pain. Another expression used is "disinclination to step around."
The patient wants the room perfectly still. If sitting up in bed, you will often find a Glonoine patient with both hands pressing upon the head with all the power possible until the arms are perfectly exhausted. He wants the head pressed upon all sides. Wants it bandaged, or a tight cap fitted down upon it. The headache is worse from betiding backward and from stooping forward. There are times when the headache is so severe that lying back upon the pillow cannot be tolerated. There is a sense of great heaviness in the head. You will notice, in reading over these congestive headaches as reported, that each patient has a different way of describing his headache and yet all have the same story to tell, that of violent determination of blood to the head.
"Some months after being violently jarred by being thrown from a carriage, a sensitiveness of the upper part of the back and neck came on." There are two strong characteristics of Glonoine in that cure, viz.: "< from wine and the < from lying down." The other symptoms might have pointed to other remedies, but these two features are there. It is interesting when reading a case, if you have first a knowledge of the Materia Medica, to note what symptoms are verified; when you do not know the Materia Medica then the case is confusing. Now, as we glance over that description we see at once these two things verified and the rest is fairly consistent. Very commonly the pain begins in the occiput and goes to the forehead, but the whole head is in a state of throbbing.
But, we notice more particularly, the "aggravation from motion and the least noise." This patient will sit in perfect quietude and silence for hours. You will be astonished to know how long a Glonoine patient can sit without moving a muscle, because motion is so painful. Also "aggravation from lying with the head low and after sleeping." It is important for you to know what that sleeping means. As I have said before, the patient very often is worse after a little sleep, but the common state is relief after a prolonged sleep. If he can sleep long enough it will subside, unless it be the congestive sleep, or coma, and then it is a different thing. "Amelioration from cold and external pressure." "Vertex burning hot, likewise upper part of back." The whole crown of the head feels as if it were covered by a hot iron, as if an oven were close by. Hot, especially in the back of the neck and between the shoulders. The burning heat seems to appear at the top of the head and extend down between the shoulders; a sensation of heat, as from a band. "Face bluish, with a heavy, stupid expression." The face- is bright red, but if the condition becomes severe the face assumes a dusky appearance, and the longer this state lasts the more dusky it becomes; that is true with apoplexy and also with sunstroke. When the sunstroke first comes on the face is bright red, intensely hot and shiny, but as the heat increases the face grows dusky, even to purple. In all of these cerebral congestions there is a stupid, heavy expression, even going on to coma. "Frequent deep inspirations." With this congestion of the head there is commonly vomiting, palpitation of the heart, pain in the stomach, great difficulty in breathing and finally loss of consciousness. In another clinical case reported we read: "Every pulsation is felt as if the head would burst." Now, suppose the head bones were already intensely sensitive and sore and the head filled as full as possible with blood, and then you commenced hammering upon the blood column you can understand that the pain would be most intense and would soon end in stupefaction. "Sunken eyes, bluish pallor under the eyes." "Red eyes, with photophobia; optical illusions. Black specks before the eyes; blindness." "Face pale, in spite of high fever." In all of these cerebral congestions of great violence the pulse fluctuates; it even becomes fine and wiry and hard; sometimes becomes irregular and also slow.
Another common accompaniment of these congestions is tumefaction about the neck. The neck feels full. The collar must be opened as it causes choking, as if he would suffocate. Even in the chronic state in the one who stands upon the street corner not knowing his way home because of the surging of blood in the head, that state is accompanied by choking and the collar causes uneasiness about the neck like Lach. He chokes and swells up under the ears. There is not only a sensation, but with the sensation there is actual swelling. Tumefaction about the neck and throat, under the chin, and the glands become swollen.
The next circumstance in the text that brings forth the general aspect of the remedy is in connection with the catamenia: The menstrual flow does not appear, it is delayed, with violent congestion to the head, violent headaches and these symptoms already described. These congestions may also come on during the menstrual period. Again, if a uterine haemorrhage stops suddenly, or a copious flow from any part stops suddenly, the patient comes down with great violence and the blood rushes to the head.
There are many conditions and complaints in life where we have surging of blood to the head, when this will be the remedy wanted. Persons who are subject to palpitation with dyspnoea, upon any effort, he cannot go uphill, he cannot walk along the pavement without bringing on palpitation and dyspnoea; any little exertion or excitement brings on the rush of blood to the heart and fainting spells; fainting spells in women, who are not supposed to be subject to fainting. Great weakness, palpitation, trembling of the limbs, shaking of one or both hands as with palsy: "Laborious action, of the heart" is a strong feature of the remedy; pulsation all over. Fluttering in the region of the heart. Pulse quick, irregular, slow or quick and wiry. There are some persons that are apparently plethoric; very much affected by the slightest exertion and who have pulsation all over; pulsation in a warm room. They are sometimes relieved by opening the window if it is cool, by fanning, by cold air, by cold applications to the head. In keeping with the remedy, this is a clinical application of it: "Children get sick in the night after sitting up at an open fire or falling asleep there." "Bad effects from having the hair cut." Bell. is generally thought of for taking cold in the head from having the hair cut. "Bad effects from being exposed to the sun's rays." "Bad effects from sunstroke."
GRATIOLA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
It is a great remedy for nervous prostration; marked lassitude, with mental and bodily weakness. It is closely related to Coffea and Nux vomica and especially useful for the weakness of the will and neuralgic pains in coffee drinkers. In hypochondria and in the female it has melancholia and nymphomania. Convulsive conditions without loss of consciousness. Complaints are better in the open air, but he is chilly in a warm room (like Pulsatilla); complaints predominate on the left side; constant vaporous exhalations from the body. Catarrhal conditions of the stomach and intestines with spasmodic ailments. There is a lack of will power and aversion to work; mental depression and capriciousness; he is very irritable and hypochondriacal; fear of the future. Complaints from pride. Bad effects from coffee and alcohol; nervous complaints associated with stomach and bowel troubles. Vertigo during and after eating; on closing the eyes; while reading; on rising from a seat; on motion; vertigo with cerebral hyperaemia. Heat and fullness of the head; sensation as though the head grew smaller; pulsation in head; in temples; rush of blood to head, after rising from stooping. The head symptoms are better in the open air and worse or come on in a warm room. Pain in the occiput in the morning on waking, better rising or lying on the face. Sick headaches, nausea, vomiting or disgust for food, with vertigo. better in the open air.
Pain in occiput from sneezing. The head feels cold and is sensitive to cold air. Cold sensation of vertex. Corrugated forehead during the headache. Itching of the scalp; itching of the eyes and ears. Mist before the eyes while reading and green objects appear white. Pain in eyes as from sand; itching in the nose. There is a sensation of burning heat in the face, but it feels cold to the hand.
Swelling of the upper lip in the morning. There is a sensation of tension of the face and tingling and it feels swollen. The face is red; the teeth ache from cold things taken in the mouth. Grinding of teeth in brain affections. Pain in the throat, compelling constant swallowing; much mucus in the throat, which he cannot eject. Violent thirst; emptiness in the stomach after eating; emptiness when he does not need or desire food. Craves nothing but bread.
Nausea better after eating and by eructations. Vomiting of bitter, sour water and mucus. A feeling of anxiety in the stomach. Cramping in the stomach after food and a heavy load that seems to go from side to side as he turns from side to side, with nausea and eructations. Distension after eating. Pressure in stomach, after eating. Marked coldness in stomach. Cramp and hard aching in stomach, pain grows rapidly worse and seems to extend to back and kidneys.
Cold feeling in abdomen. Cramping like colic with nausea. Rumbling in abdomen with distension in afternoon and evening. Swelling of mesenteric glands. Pinching in abdomen, better by passing flatus. Diarrhoea, with copious gushing, yellow or yellowish-green, frothy, watery stools; copious watery vomiting and purging, like cholera morbus; copious green watery stools. The diarrhoea is brought on from drinking large quantities of water, due to the violent thirst. During the diarrhoea he is often sensitive to draft and open air which give him urging to stool. It has cured fully developed, rapid Asiatic cholera. Green stools and green vomiting, unconscious stools.
Before stool, nausea; rumbling, cutting; tenesmus. During stool, nausea; burning in rectum; straining. After stool, burning in rectum; tenesmus; pain in coccyx; creeping chills; pain in abdomen. Protrusion of stinging, burning, haemorrhoids. Tearing and pricking in anus. Constriction in anus; itching anus. Ascarides. Burning in the urethra during and after urination; scanty urine becomes turbid on standing; unconscious discharge of urine. Stitching in left spermatic cord to abdomen and chest.
It is a most useful remedy in the female when there is marked irritability of the sexual organs, if the sexual desire is greatly excited; it is one of our best remedies for nymphomania. When the desire is so violent that it drives her to secret vice the remedies are: Gelsemium, Gratiola, Origanum, Nux vomica, Phosphorus, Platina and Zincum. The menses are too early and profuse; darting pain in right mamma when stooping and during menses worse on rising; leucorrhoea with pains in sacrum.
Violent palpitation after stool (Conium) with oppression of chest; heat in chest, head, hands, with red face. Rheumatic pains in upper limbs; sore bruised pains in lower limbs, after walking; tearing in the tibia while sitting, better while walking. Sleepiness after eating; deep sleep. Itching and burning of the skin, after scratching.
GUAIACUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This is a very deep acting remedy, even deep enough to cure the symptoms of and turn into order a constitution that is rheumatic, gouty, and has inherited phthisis. These patients are subject to diar rhoea; the tendons are too short, or they have abscesses, catarrhal troubles, bronchitis. Drawing, tension and contractions of muscular fiber. Sore swollen joints. The rheumatic joints are more painful from warmth (Lac c., Led., Puls.) and more comfortable when cool. Gouty- abscesses of joints. The bones become spongy, or suppurate. The leg and ankle bones are especially affected. Sensitive periosteum.
Stitching pains are characteristic, and burning is as marked as in Arsenicum. Limbs contracted and stiff. The . excretions are all offensive. Drawing, tearing pains. His cold settles in the limbs, and the joints become sore and the muscles draw. His suffering is increased by the slightest motion or exertion. Gradually increasing exhaustion. Progressive amaciation. In the first stage of phthisis it is a wonderful remedy, when the symptoms agree. The progressive character of the sickness, the weakness of mind and body, and such symptoms as belong to deep constitutional troubles. In psoric cases complicated with syphilis and mercury and other violent drugs we find use for this most neglected remedy. It is closely related to Causticum, Sulphur, and Tuberculinum.
Absent minded in the morning. Indolent, and low spirited. Obstinate; fretful, and forgetful. Vertigo on rising.
Rheumatic pain in one side of the head, extending to the face. Gouty headaches. Sensation of looseness of the brain. Stitching in the head. Pain in forehead, occiput, and deep in the brain. Tearing pain in the head. Sensation as if blood vessels were distended. Neuralgia on left side of face and head. Pulsating pain, ameliorated by pressure and walking; aggravated by sitting and standing. This is an exception to the general rule, as most symptoms are aggravated by motion. Perspiration on head and face, when walking in the open air.
Sensation of protrusion of the eyes. Swelling of the eyes. Dilated pupils. Tearing in left ear. Paroxysmal pain in ear. Pain in the bones of the nose. Nose swollen. Fluent coryza.
Pain in the bones of the face, nose and teeth. Face red and swollen, spotted. Heat in the face in the evening. Sharp pain in right malar bone. Paroxysmal pain in face, head and neck, every day at 6 P. M., lasting until 4 A. M. Dull ache in left side of jaw. Tearing, stitching in teeth. Pain in teeth when biting jaws together. Inflammation of the tonsils, worse from warm drinks, and there is much burning.
Perverted taste. Tongue coated thick white, or brown. Burning in throat. Tonsilitis; it prevents suppuration. Aversion to food, to milk. Much thirst. Vomits a mass of watery mucus, followed by exhaustion. Nausea from sensation of mucus in throat.
Burning in stomach and abdomen. Constrictive sensation in stomach, with anguish and dyspnoea. Much flatulence in abdomen. Morning diarrhoea (Sulph.). Stools watery. Constipation, with hard, crumbling, offensive stool.
Urging to urinate, even after micturition. The urine is profuse, and foetid. Cutting in urethra while urine flows. Stitching in neck of bladder after ineffectual urging to urinate. Emissions without dreams. Discharge from urethra.
Chronic inflammation of ovaries. Menses absent. Membranous dysmenorrhoea. Shuddering in mammae, with gooseflesh. Spasms of larynx. Difficult breathing. Palpitation. Dry, hard cough with fever, finally relieved by expectoration. Copious, putrid expectoration, like pus. Expectoration of blood.
Rheumatism of the muscles of the chest, with great pain on motion. Stitching pains in chest from motion and breathing. Stitching pains seem to be in the pleura. Chronic bronchial catarrh with putrid expectoration, when rheumatism extends to chest. Phthisis pituitosa in rheumatic and gouty patients. Chest pains after riding in open air. Palpitation of the heart. Rheumatism of the heart; frequent weak pulse.
Rheumatic stiffness of back of neck and back. Stitching in neck and back. Drawing pains in back between scapulae. All pains aggravated from motion and ameliorated during rest; aggravated from heat. Drawing, tearing, stitching pains in upper limbs. Rheumatic pains in upper arm and shoulder. Pains in finger joints, and then in whole hand. Hot hands. Stitching in right thumb. Pains all aggravated from motion; aggravated from heat.
Shortening of the hamstrings. Pain in thighs extending to knees. Tearing, drawing pains in legs. Pains in the tibia. Gouty abscess of knee. Shooting pains in legs from feet to knees. Softening of tibia and ankle bones. The knee is flexed from the contraction of hamstrings. The right leg swollen and drawn dose to the thigh. Pains in all the limbs, aggravated from motion and heat. Weakness of arms and legs. Numbness of lower limbs. Stiffness of limbs. Weakness of limbs after exertion. Rheumatism of joints, aggravated from heat and motion. Pain in limbs after taking cold. Restless sleep. Sleeplessness. Wakens from sleep as if falling. Nightmare while lying on the back. Unrefreshing sleep.
Chilliness followed by fever in the evening. Burning fever. Hot hands. Night sweats. Copious perspiration. The provers that perspired had no urinary symptoms.
HYOSCYAMUS
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Hyoscyamus is full of convulsions, contractions, trembling, quivering and jerkings of the muscles. Convulsions in vigorous people, coming on with great violence. Convulsions that involve the whole economy, with unconsciousness, coming on in the night. Convulsions in women at the menstrual period ; and then the lesser convulsions of single muscles, and contractions of single muscles. Little jerkings and twitchings. In low forms of the disease it takes on the latter, jerkings and twitchings of muscles. In low typhoid states where there is great prostration with twitching. He feels it himself if conscious enough to realize it, but others see it. An evidence of great prostration of the nervous system. Sliding down in bed, twitching of the muscles. All the muscles tremble and quiver, a constant state of erethism throughout the economy. A state of irritability and excitability. Convulsive jerks of the limbs, so that all sorts of angular motions are made, automatic motions. Choreic motions. But angular motions of the arms, and picking at the bedclothes. Picking at something in delirium. Gradually increasing weakness, whether it be in a continued fever where there has been a delirium or excitement, or in a case of insanity with erethism of the nerves and mind ; excitability and gradually increasing weakness. Complete prostration, so that the patient slides down in bed, until the jaw drops. So the intermingling of jerkings and quiverings and tremblings and weakness and convulsive action of muscles are all striking features. Infants go into convulsions. "Falls suddenly to the ground with cries and convulsions. Convulsions of children, especially from fright. Convulsions after eating." The child becomes sick after eating, vomits and goes into convulsions. "Shrieks and becomes insensible." Goes into convulsions, such as the old books used to say, from worms; and the mother goes into convulsions soon after the child is born, called puerperal convulsions. "Convulsions during sleep. Suffocating spells and convulsions during labor. Toes become spasmodically cramped."
The mental state is really the greatest part of Hyoscyamus. Talking, passive delirium, imaginations, illusions, hallucinations; talking, rousing up and talking with a delirious manifestation, and then stupor. These alternate through complaints. And during sleep talking, crying out in sleep; but, talking and mumbling and soliloquizing. Then, there are wakeful periods, in which there are delirium and illusions and hallucinations all mingled together. Sometimes the patient is in a state of hallucination, and the next minute in a state of illusion. Which means that a part of the time what he sees as hallucinations he believes to be so; and then these hallucinations become delusions. Again, the things he sees he knows are not so, and then they are illusions. But he is full of hallucinations. He sees all sorts of things, indescribable things in his hallucinations. He imagines all sorts of things concerning people, concerning himself, and he gets suspicious. Suspicion runs through acute sickness; it runs through the mania in insanity, Suspicion that his wife is going to poison him; that his wife is untrue to him. Suspicious of everybody. "Refuses to take medicine because it is poisoned." "Imagines that he is pursued, that the people have all turned against him, that his friends are no longer his friends. He carries on conversations with imaginary people." Talks as if he were talking to himself, but he really imagines that someone is sitting by his side, to whom he is talking. Sometimes he talks to dead folks; recalls past events with those that have departed. Calls up a dead sister, or wife, or husband, and enters into conversation just as if the person were present.
Hyoscyamus has another freak in this peculiar mental state. Perhaps there may be a queer kind of paper on the wall, and he lies and looks at it, and if he can possibly turn the figures into rows he will keep busy at that day and night, and he wants a light there so he can put them into rows, and he goes to sleep and dreams about it, and wakes up and goes at it again; it is the same idea. Sometimes he will imagine the things are worms, are vermin, rats, cats, mice, and he is leading them like children lead around their toy wagons just like a child. The mind is working in this; no two alike; perhaps you may never see these identical things described, but you will see something like it that the mind is reveling in, strange and ridiculous things. One patient had a string of bedbugs going up the wall, and he had them tied with a string, and was irritated because he could not make the last one keep up. Hyoscyamus did him a great deal of good. You do not find that expression in the text, but I will speak of it as analogous to the things that belong to the text. He is in alternate states. One minute he raves, and another he scolds in delirium, in excitement; the next he is in a stupor. Finally, in a typhoid state, after he has progressed some time, he passes into quite a profound stupor. Early in the case he can be roused, and he answers questions correctly, and he seems to know what you have said to him; but the instant he finishes the last answer he appears to be sound asleep. Then you shake him and ask him another question, he answers that, and again he is sound asleep. The delirium that belongs to typhoid grows more and more profound, more and more passive, more and more muttering, until he passes into a complete unconsciousness from which he cannot be roused; in which he will lie for days sometimes, and weeks, becoming more and more emaciated; lying there in profound stupor unless this remedy is administered. Lying there picking the bedclothes, and muttering. Even when he is in a stupor and realizes nothing, apparently, that is going on, he makes passive motions, mutters, talks to himself, and once in a while utters a shrill scream. Picking his fingers, just as if he had something in his fingers when there is nothing there. He picks at the bedclothes the same way. Picking at his nightshirt, or picking anything he can get his fingers on. Or, picking in the air, grasping as if he were grasping at flies. This passive delirium goes on until he is in a profound stupor, and lies as one dead. In an insane state it sometimes takes on something of wildness, but not often. It is more passive, talking and prattling, sitting still in one corner and jabbering, or lying down, or going about. "Undertaking to do the usual things, the usual duties." That is, the housewife will want to get up and do the things she is used to doing in the house; the cooper will want to make barrels and the usual things belonging to that business. Wants to carry on the usual occupation in his mind, talks about it, carries on the things of the day, and he keeps busy about it, so it is a busy insanity. Also, the delirium takes on the type of a busy delirium.
Now, to give you something of an idea as to the grading of this general type of insanity it should be compared with Strain, and Bell. You heard in the lecture on Bell. that it is violent, its fever most intense. There is much excitement. In Strain., when we reach that you will see that his delirium, his insanity, is expressed in terms of extreme violence. These three run so close together that something can be brought out by associating them together. When considering Hyoscyamus in its mental state it is well to realize that it seldom has much fever in its insanity. It has a fever sometimes in the low form, but when Hyoscyamus is thought of in relation to a febrile state the intensity of the heat would be this order: Bell., Strain., Hyoscyamus. Now, Bell, is very hot in its mental states. Strain., most violent and active, murderously violent, is moderately hot in its fever, as a rule. Hyoscyamus has a low fever, not very high, sometimes none at all, with its insanity. When one comes to take into consideration the violence of its delirium, or the maniacal actions, then it changes the order. The order as to violence of conduct would be: Strain., Bell., Hyoscyamus. That brings you to see that even when associated with those medicines that look most like it, it is at the bottom of the list. It goes as a passive medicine, while the upper ones are more active. Hyoscyamus has a passive mania. Does not go into violence. That is, the patient will sometimes become murderous, but it is more likely to be suicidal. Sometimes the patient will talk and prattle, sometimes sit and say nothing. "Full of imaginations and hallucinations when asleep and when awake.. Religious turn of mind" with women who have been unusually pious; they take on the delusion that they have sinned away their day of grace. They have done some awful things. "She imagines that she has murdered, that she has done some dreadful thing. She cannot apply the promises that she reads in the Word of God to herself." She will say: "They do not mean me, they do not apply to me, they mean somebody else."
"Thinks he is in the wrong place. Thinks he is not at home. Sees persons who are not and who have not been present. Fears being left alone. Fears poison or being bitten." These phases sometimes take on fear in the sense of fear, but it comes from that suspicion that was spoken of ; lie suspicions or fears these things will take place. He imagines these things are to take place, and hence he is suspicious of all his friends.
Another thing running through the remedy, in insanity and in the delirium of fevers, is a fear of water, fear of running water. Of course, hydrophobia, which is named because of that symptom being a striking feature, has fear of water, but some remedies also have that fear of water. "Anxiety on hearing running water. A fear of water." That runs through Bell., Hyoscyamus, Canth., and, of course, the nosode Hydrophobinum. Strain. has the fear of water. Straw. has the fear of anything that might look like water, shining objects, fire, looking-glass. Fear of things that have in any manner whatever the resemblance of fluids, and hence the sound of fluids. Hydrophobinum has cured "involuntary urination on hearing running water. Involuntary discharge from the bowels on hearing running water." It has cured a chronic diarrhoea when that symptom was present. Hyoscyamus "makes short, abrupt answers to imaginary questions." Imagines that somebody has asked a question, and he answers it; hence, you will find a patient with typhoid fever answering questions that you have not asked. He imagines that persons are in the room and asking him questions. You hear nothing but his answers; .he is in delirium or insane. "Mutters absurd things to himself. Cries out suddenly."
There is another form of his delirium, and there are two phases of this. He wants to go naked; wants to take the clothing off, and this must be analyzed. At first you might not understand that. Hyoscyamus has such sensitive nerves all over the body in the skin that he cannot bear the clothing to touch the skin, and he takes it off. That occurs in insanity and sometimes in delirium, and he has no- idea that he is exposing his body. He appears to be perfectly shameless, but he has no thought of shamelessness, no thought- that he is doing anything unusual, but he does it from the hyperaesthesia of the skin.
There is another phase running through the insanity, which is salacity, and it is violent at times, so violent that nobody but the old doctor can form any conception of the awfulness of it, and the dreadfulness of its effects upon those in the room. With a woman, a wife or a daughter, this state of salacity is manifested in this way: she exposes her genitals to the view of everybody coming into the room. There are instances where in these violent attacks of salacity a woman has gathered her clothing up under her arms to expose her genitals to the doctor as he walked into the room.
"Violent sexual excitement and nymphomania. Obscene things. Speech illustrated by urine, faeces and cow dung," and all sorts of things will come out in this state of insanity and delirium and yet this is only sickness.
"He is violent and beats people. Strikes and bites. Sings constantly and talks hastily. Erotic mania, accompanied by jealousy. Lascivious mania. Sings amorous songs. Lies in bed naked, or wrapped in a skin during summer heat." Not because he is cold, but because of a fancy. Complaints involving any of these mental phases may come on in a young woman from disappointed affections, from coming to the conclusion that the young man in whom she has reposed her confidence has become wholly unworthy of her. It drives her insane, and she may take on any of these phases.
Patients who have come out of continued fevers, convulsions, or insanity have paralytic conditions of the eyes, of the muscles of the eyes. "Disturbances of vision. Far-sightedness. Drawing tension in some of the muscles, and paralysis in others. Strabismus." This is one of the most frequently indicated remedies. The strabismus that comes on from brain disease should be cured with a remedy.
In the Hyoscyamus fevers there is so much brain trouble, and there is left behind a tendency to muscular weakness of the eyes, disturbances of the eyes, and congestion of the retina, and disturbances of vision. Double sight. "Obscuration of vision. Night-blindness. Distorted appearance of the eyes. Spasmodic action of the internal recti." "Pupils dilated and insensible to light." Sometimes contracted, but in these low unconscious states of typhoid it is likely to be dilated. Then again, after he recovers from these low forms of disease there is quivering of the lids, and jerking of the lids,- jerking of the muscles of the eye, so that the eyeball is unsteady. It moves from little spasms of the various muscles of the globe of the eye. All of these symptoms occur either along with the fever, or afterwards. The child goes into convulsions, or has periods of convulsions, where, during -the course of a week or ten days, there have been from fifteen to fifty convulsions, and it may be the convulsions have been remedied with Bell. or Cuprum, or any one of a number of remedies, and afterwards these eye troubles, strabismus and disturbances of vision. "An object looked at jumps." The letters jump while reading. Spasmodic complaints, periodical complaints, paroxysmal complaints of a nervous character will run through the remedy in various regions, and especially in its cough, its stomach troubles and abdominal conditions.
The mouth brings forth a lot of symptoms. The mouth is very dry, "as dry as burnt leather." The tongue tastes like sole leather, because of the dryness. Sometimes the patient will say, "My tongue rattles in my mouth, it is so dry." Very great dryness of the mouth, throat and nose, wherever the mucous membranes are. Dry, cracked, red, will bleed in low forms of typhoid. About the second week, going into the third, the teeth are covered with black blood, lips cracked and bleeding. "Tongue cracked and bleeding. Patient unconscious, except by much shaking or repeated calling he is roused" and slowly puts out that trembling tongue, which is covered with blood, cracks, and is dry. "Sordes on the teeth" in low forms of fever. "Twitching of the muscles of the face upon attempting to put out the tongue." It trembles like it does in Lach., catches on to the teeth from its great dryness, and the jaw hangs down, -relaxed, the mouth wide open. The whole mouth is dry and offensive. Sometimes during fever the jaw becomes fixed as if it were locked, and it is with great difficulty that it can be moved. "Closes the teeth tightly together. Pulsating pains in the teeth. Jerking, throbbing, tearing in the teeth. Sordes on the teeth;" and in sleep in these low forms of fever he is grinding the teeth. Children, either in convulsions, or between convulsions, in congestion, also grind the -teeth in the night, and in this comatose state. It says in the text, "The tongue is red, brown, dry, cracked, hard. Looks like burnt leather. The tongue does not obey the will. Difficult motion of the tongue; it -is stiff, protruded with great difficulty. Biting the tongue in- talking." The tongue becomes paralyzed. "Loss of speech. Utters inarticulate sounds. Speech embarrassed. Talks with difficulty." The muscles of the throat, of the tongue, those that take part in swallowing, the muscles of the oesophagus, of the pharynx, become stiff and paralyzed so that swallowing is difficult. "Food taken into the throat comes up into the nose." Fluids come out of the nose, or go down into the larynx. "The sight of water, or the hearing of running water, or the attempt to swallow water produces spasmodic constriction of the oesophagus."
The next very important feature of this medicine is its stomach and abdominal symptoms. Vomiting. Dread of water. Unquenchable thirst. Aversion to water, as it were, from the stomach; a mental fear of water. The stomach is distended. Great pain in the stomach. Dryness evidently in the stomach like there is in the mouth, because it-occurs along with it. Burning and smarting in the stomach; and when there is no inflammation there is vomiting of blood. Stitching pains, colicky pains, distension. The distension of the whole abdomen. "Abdomen wonderfully distended, almost to bursting." Feels like a drum, tympanitic. "Great soreness ; can hardly- touch the abdomen because of the soreness. Cannot be handled, cannot be turned except with great difficulty, very slowly, and with caution. Cutting pains in the abdomen." Inflammation of all the viscera of the abdomen in low typhoid state, with great distension. Petechia upon the abdomen, such as is found in a typhoid.
Then comes the diarrhoea, very much like that which is found in low forms of continued fever. "Bleeding from the bowels; ulceration of Peyer's glands," and the yellow, cornmeal mushy stool. In Hyoscyamus there is that mushy stool that occurs in typhoid fever, poppy consistency. Again, a watery, horribly offensive, bloody fluid. Most of the time the stools and the passages are painless. "Painless discharges from the bowels. Watery mucus, sometimes odorless, but commonly very offensive." Then, another part of it is that the patient has no realization of the passage. It is involuntary. Both the urine and the stool are passed without his knowledge. Watery, bloody, or mushy. Hysterical females and young girls, who are subject to attacks of diarrhoea and bloody stools. Relaxed state of the bowels connected with relaxation of the uterus. "Diarrhoea during pregnancy. Diarrhoea during typhoid fever. Paralysis of the sphincter ani. Paralysis of the bladder after labor, so that the urine remains in the bladder, with no desire to urinate." The routine remedy for retention of urine after labor is Caust. Caust., like Rhus, is a great remedy for the effect of strain upon muscles and parts, and the violent effort that a woman passes through in expelling the child in many instances leaves all the pelvic muscles tired, relaxed, paralyzed.
Then comes that which was mentioned, which really belongs to the general state more than the local; violent- sexual desire. Violent sexual desire in girls who never had that desire. Coming on and manifesting itself only during the inflammation of the brain.
"Labor-like pains from taking cold." A cold settles in the uterus, bringing on painful menstruation. Hyoscyamus has various .crampings; cramps in the fingers and toes and of the muscles here and there; temporary paralysis, etc. It has suppressed menstruation. There are many conditions belonging to menstruation, pregnancy and parturition that are hysterical in character. Twitchings, cough, constipation diarrhoea, etc., that belong to a hysterical nature. "Puerperal convulsions. Jerks violently at the oncoming of the convulsions. After miscarriage, haemorrhage of bright red blood. No desire of the bladder to expel the contents."
And then comes the voice, the larynx, respiration, and cough. Constriction of the larynx. Much mucus in the larynx and air passages, makes the speech and voice rough. Hoarseness with dry and inflamed throat. Speech difficult. Hysterical aphonia. Hyoscyamus and Veratrum are two medicines that cure and make a nervous hysterical woman a great deal more sensible.
"Difficult spasmodic respiration from spasms of the chest. Apparently loss of breath; rattling in the chest." Hysterical cough. Sensitive, hysterical girls; or sensitive women, with spinal irritation, have paroxysmal cough, coming on periodically, coming on from excitement. When this patient lies down in the daytime, at night, any time; on will come the spasmodic cough with contractions in the larynx, spasms in the larynx, choking, gagging, and vomiting. "Redness of the face, and suffocation." It is a dry, hacking, choking cough, that racks the whole body, in spinal affections. "Tickling in the larynx. Dry, hacking, and spasmodic cough, worse lying, better sitting, worse at night, after eating, drinking, talking and singing. Dry, spasmodic, persistent cough." But its characteristic cough is a dry, racking, harassing cough, worse lying down. Those young women and girls with sore spots on the spine from the coccyx to the brain, sore places that manifest themselves when leaning back against a chair. These take a little cold in the larynx, and sometimes it is purely from a nervous attack. Sometimes spinal irritation, spinal cough in those that have curvature of the spine. "During cough, spasms in the larynx. Cough worse after midnight; wakes the patient from sleep. Cough in cold air, and from eating and drinking. Cough after measles. Violent spasmodic cough." The cough is most exhausting. A cough will sometimes last until the patient is covered with sweat and is exhausted, and leans forward -to get a little relief; and he coughs until he is exhausted." Spasms of the muscles of the chest. Contraction of the muscles of one side of the neck. Spinal meningitis with convulsions."
Paralytic weakness of the limbs. Convulsions of the muscles. Twitching. Frequent twitchings of the muscles of the hands and feet. Many complaints come on during -sleep. The sleep is a great tribulation to this nervous patient. There are times of sleeplessness.
Again, profound sleep. "Sleepless, or constant sleep." Either awake or asleep, there may be muttering. "Long continued sleeplessness. Lascivious dreams. Lying on the back he suddenly sits up and then lies down again." That means that the patient wakes out of sleep, looks all around, wonders what terrible thing he has been dreaming about; his dream seems real. He looks all about and sees nothing of the objects of his dream, he lies down and goes to sleep again. He keeps doing that all night. Starts up in a fright. Jerks in sleep, and cries out. Grates the teeth. Laughing during sleep. With so much brain trouble as belongs to this medicine, we would expect the dreams and the f right, the disturbances, the twitching and trembling in sleep. Its fevers are low forms of fever, the continued fever, the typhoid.
HYPERICUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
One who makes a study of the proving of Hypericum will be reminded of a class of injuries involving sentient nerves, and it is not surprising that this remedy has come into use for the results of such injuries. The surgery of Homoeopathy largely involves the use of Arnica, Rhus tox., Ledum, Staphisagria, Calcarca and Hypericum. These remedies are used in a routine way when a physician runs into semi-surgical conditions, or the results of injuries. For the bruised, "black-and- blue," sore appearance and sensation Arnica comes into use; it corresponds especially to the acute stage until the soreness and bruised condition have disappeared from the parts injured or from the whole body; but for the strains of muscles and tendons Arnica proves insufficient and a thorough study of Rhus will show that that remedy is suitable for the resultant weakness of tendons and muscles, and the bruised, rheumatic feelings that come on in every storm and often wear off on continued motion. For the final weakness that persists even after Rhus we have Calcarca carb.
In these three remedies we have a series, but to distinguish these from Hypericum is the important thing. Hypericum is only a minor remedy for bruised and strained tendons and muscles; it goes into a different class of complaints. Hypericum and Ledum run close together, and they have to be compared. Ledum has much of the sore bruised feeling of Arnica and will often take its place; but Hypericum and Ledum come together for consideration when an injury to a nerve has taken on inflammatory action. Instead of the muscles and bones and blood vessels, as in Arnica, Rhus and Calcarea, the nerves are the sphere for these two remedies. When the finger ends or toes have been bruised or lacerated, or a nail has been torn off, or when a nerve has become pinched between a hammer and the bone in a blow, and that nerve becomes inflamed and the pain can be traced up along the nerve, and it is gradually extending toward the body from the injured part with stitching, darting pains, coming and going, or shooting up from the region of the injury toward the body, a dangerous condition is coming on. In this condition Hyped-cum is above all the remedies to be thought of and hardly any other medicine is likely to come in. It hardly need be said that lock-jaw is threatening.
Sometimes a vicious dog will take hold of an individual through the thumb, or through the hand or the wrist and run one of his great teeth through the radial nerve or some of its branches in the hand, causing a lacerated wound. You may not find in the earlier stages the symptoms of Hypericum, but they will develop gradually and you will have them to treat. Do not cut the arm off, but cure it. We cure all these injuries with medicines punctured, incised, contused and lacerated wounds, painful wounds.
A wound will sometimes yawn, swell up, no tendency to heal, look dry and shiny on its edges; red; inflamed; burning, stinging, tearing pains; no healing process. That wound needs Hypericum. It prevents tetanus. Every practitioner knows that lock-jaw may develop after an injury to sentient nerves. The old school doctor is frightened by these shooting pains up the arms after an injury. A shoemaker may stick his awl into the end of his thumb or a carpenter may stick his finger with a brass tack and he does not think much of it, but the next night shooting pains extend up the arm with much violence. The allopathic physician looks upon that as a serious matter, for he sees lock-jaw or tetanus ahead. When these pains come on Hypericum will stop them, and from this stage to advanced states of tetanus with opisthotonos and lock-jaw. Hypericum is the remedy. It is full of just such symptoms as are found in tetanus and such symptoms as lead to tetanus and it is full of all the manifestations of an ascending neuritis.
Again, you may have an old scar, and it comes in contact with a hard body and is injured, bruised, torn internally, smashed, and stinging, tearing pains come in that cicatrix, and it burns and stings, and there is no relief, and the pain runs toward the body along the course of nerves. A painful cicatrix with pain shooting up toward the center of the body following up the nerves. Hypericum medicine for that.
Now there are other remedies all know about Arnica, but be sure you keep it in its place. The first stage of the injury, where much bruising has been done, and there are none of these pains that I have described, for the first hours for bruised conditions and concussions and shocks Arnica is routine, because it produces states upon the human body like it had been bruised. But you will find Arnica only fits into that one place. Arnica should never be used for wounds the way the lay people use it, because if it is used in full strength it may bring on erysipelas.
Again, for bruises of bone, cartilages, tendons, insertion of tendons, bruises about cartilages and about joints, Ruta is better than any other remedy; and if we study the proving of Ruta we will not be surprised, because it produces symptoms like those found in such conditions. Lingering, sore, bruised places on hones, in joints and upon cartilages. But Ledum comes in very often as a preventive medicine. It is a preventive medicine when an accident happens to the ends of the fingers, if a patient steps on a nail or tack or sticks a splinter under a finger-nail or into the foot. If a horse picks up a nail, pull it out and give him a dose of Ledum; there will never be trouble, he will not have lock-jaw. These punctured wounds, rat bites, cat bites, etc., are all made safe by Ledum; i. e., Ledum prevents the shooting pains that naturally come and the nerves will never be involved. We will have no trouble if we can give it at once. Again, if the pain is a dull aching in the part that was injured, in the wound, Ledum is still the remedy; if it shoots from the wound up the nerve of the arm it is more like Hypericum.
A sensitive nervous woman steps on a tack during the day, and she feels all the day where the tack went in, lies down in bed and it aches so violently she cannot keep it still. Ledum will prevent any further trouble, but if that goes on until the morning the pains will, be shooting up the leg, calling for Hypericum. I mentioned the use of Ledum when a horse picks up a nail. Now, if a nail goes through the thin part of the hoof and strikes the coffin bone that horse is almost sure to die with tetanus; the veterinarians know nothing for it; though they poultice it and put on liniments etc., that horse will die with tetanus; but if a dose of Ledum is given before the tetanus comes on it will save the animal from tetanus; after the jerking comes on Ledum will not do, but Hypericum must be given. Hypericum belongs to lacerated wounds and when there is laceration of parts that are full of small nerves, sentient nerves, give it at once. Do not waste time with Arnica because there is soreness, for the soreness is of much less importance than the danger from nerves in lacerated wounds. In punctured wounds give Ledum at once. Whatever sequences conic on, of course, have to be met in accordance with the state and symptoms of the case.
Injuries of the spine give us another class of troubles requiring Hypericum. I remember a case such as has been met with quite often and such as we read of and hear about, one, however, that was not saved. A sudden lurch of the car caused a man who was standing on the rear end of the car to be hurled back on his coccyx. He did not think much of it, went home, had pains in the head and various parts of the body. Several physicians were called; nobody could find out what was the matter with him, and at the end of ten days he died. They turned him over and found that his coccyx was black and an abscess was threatening in the muscular region. If it had been known Hypericum would have saved his life. Many times I have seen Hypericum cure similar conditions. Injuries of the coccyx are among the most serious and troublesome injuries that the physician comes in contact with; injuries just like that, falling back and striking a stone, or something that bruises the coccyx. Very little is found immediately in the coccyx; close examination reveals nothing more than soreness upon pressure, but many times we do have the description of pains shooting up the spine and down the extremities, shooting pains over the body and often convulsive movements. When such symptoms are present any physician ought to be wise enough to find out an injury, but even very astute physicians are blinded over injuries of the coccyx. Many a woman sustains an injury of the coccyx during labor, and however slight, soreness remains for years afterwards, and she is always in trouble, always hysterical and nervous, from this injury of the coccyx. Such injuries, if taken early, can be cured by Hypericum. It is in the remedy. Slight inflammation or irritation of the lower part of the cord; it feels lacerated, and sore, and aches and never passes over until the results of the injury right in the spot have been removed. These injuries have been cured in after years by Carbo animalis, Silica and Thuja and other remedies as indicated.
It is related also to injuries of the spine higher up. It is not an uncommon thing for a man, while going down stairs, to fall backward, his feet to slip from under him and he strikes his back upon one of the steps and undergoes a sharp injury. Some will at once give Rhus tox.; I have known others to give Arnica. Hypericum is to be given at once to prevent the kind of inflammation that may come from such an injury. Then there will be other tendencies, such as drawings and rheumatic symptoms, that will come on, calling for Rhus and finally Calcarea. Old weaknesses of the back, with painfulness on rising from a seat, are often cured by Rhus, followed by Calcarea, but Hypericum must first of all take care of the condition of the fibers of the cord and meninges. Meningeal troubles are common from injuries of that class, with drawing of the muscles of the back, a feeling of contraction or tightening. Stitching, shooting pains in the back in various directions; they shoot down the limbs. Injuries of the back are not so likely to end in tetanus as the injuries of the sensory nerves; but they are sometimes even more troublesome because they linger so long.
Persons who have been injured in the spine or about the coccyx linger along for years with symptoms that would lead to many remedies. We find in the provings such symptoms as occur after these injuries, and, of course, this remedy will cure anything that its proving justifies. Its action is upon the nerve sheaths and meninges, with stitching, tearing, rending pains along the nerves, wherever there are injuries. Now, there is another remedy that we want to know. If you have a clear-cut or incised wound made with a sharp instrument, or if you have made such an opening with your knife while practicing surgery, if you have opened the abdominal cavity and the walls of the abdomen take on an unhealthy look, and there are stinging, burning pains, Staphisagria is the remedy that will make granulation come immediately. Staphisagria is also a wonderfully useful remedy where the sphincter stretchers have been. Staphisagria is the natural antidote to stretching. When the urethra of a woman has been stretched for stone in the bladder, Staphisagria is useful. I remember a case of stretching of the urethra; after the operation the patient was in great distress, screaming and crying, bathed in a cold sweat, head hot and body in cold sweat. Staphisagria was given to her, and in a few minutes she went to sleep. She had been six hours in that suffering without any relief whatever. Where coldness, congestion of the head, and rending, tearing pains occur from stretching sphincters, or from tearing parts, for the purpose of operation, death is likely to occur, and Staphisagria is closely related to that tearing, lacerating and stretching of fibers which cause such suffering.
After a surgical operation, where there has been much cutting, a great state of prostration, coldness, oozing of blood, almost cold breath, of course the Materia Medica man, if there is one around, will say, "Why, give him Carbo veg., of course." Yes, you will, but it will not help him. It may disappoint you. But if you are a surgeon, know your surgical therapeutics better than a Materia Medica man, you will say, "No Strontium carb, is what I want." It relieves that congestion all over the body; he gets warm and has a comfortable night. Strontium carb. is the Carbo veg. of the surgeon.
Lastly, we sometimes have to antidote chloroform, and because there are pains and aches you will get no action from these medicines; you can antidote your chloroform almost instantly by a dose of Phosphorus, because it is the natural antidote of chloroform. Phosphorus will stop the vomiting. Phosphorus has vomiting like that of chloroform. Phosphorus likes cold things, cold water in the stomach, and vomits as soon as water has become warm in the stomach. So does chloroform. Why should they not antidote each other?
IGNATIA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Ignatia is frequently required and is especially suited to sensitive, delicate women and children; to hysterical women. You will not cure the natural hysterics with Ignatia, but you will cure those gentle, sensitive, fine fibred, refind, highly educated, overwrought women in their nervous complaints with Ignatia when they take on complaints that are similar to such symptoms as come in hysteria. The hysterical diathesis is one that is very singular and difficult to comprehend. But a woman, when overwrought and overexcited and emotional, will do things that she herself cannot account for. She will do things as if she were crazy in her excitement. Will do things she regrets, while the hysteric is always glad of it. No matter how much foolishness there is in it she has only made an exhibition that she is proud of. But our efforts go out for those who imitate them unconsciously. Those who will to do well.
A woman has undergone a controversy at home. She has been disturbed, is excited, and goes into cramps, trembles and quivers. Goes to bed with a headache. Is sick. Ignatia will be her remedy. When she has great distress; unrequited affections. A sensitive, nervous young girl finds out that she has misplaced her affections; the young man has disappointed her; she has a weeping spell, headache, trembles, is nervous, sleepless; Ignatia will make her philosophical and sensible. A woman loses her child, or her husband. A sensitive, delicate woman, and she suffers from this grief. She has headaches, trembles, is excited, weeps, is sleepless; unable to control herself. In spite of her best endeavors, her grief has simply -torn her to pieces. She is unable to control her emotions and her excitement. Ignatia will quiet her and tide her over the present moment. In all of these instances where all of these conditions brought on from such troubles keep coming back, where your patient dwells upon the cause, and the state keeps recurring, upon them, Natrum mur. will finish up the case. It will nerve her up and help her to bear her sufferings. Especially useful in constitutions that have been overwrought at school, in science, music, art. Of course, it is natural for very sensitive girls to go into the arts, such as music, painting, etc. A daughter conies back from Paris after a number of years close application to her music. She is unable to do anything. She flies all to pieces. Every noise disturbs her. She cannot sleep nights. Excitable, sleepless, trembles, jerks, cramps in the muscles; weeps from excitement, and from every disturbing word. Ignatia will tone her up wonderfully. Sometimes it will complete the whole case. But especially in these oversensitive girls is Natrum mur. very commonly the chronic. It is the natural chronic of Ignatia. When the troubles keep coming back, and Ignatia conies to a place when it will not hold any longer.
Another place where Ignatia and Natrum mur. run close together. A sensitive, overtired girl, after she has been working in music, and in art, and in school, and has tired herself out, is unable to control her affections. Her affections rest on someone whom she would despise. That may be a singular thing, one may not be able to understand it. A sensitive girl, though she would not let anyone but her mother know of it, falls in love with a married man. She lies awake nights, sobs. She says, "Mother, why do I do that, I cannot keep that man out of my mind." At other times a man entirely out of her station, that she is too sensible to have anything to do with, she just thinks about him. Ignatia, if it is very recent, will balance up that girl's mind. If not, Natrum mur. comes in as a follower. We do not know half as much about the human mind as we think we do. We only know its manifestations. These little things belong to this sphere of the action of this medicine. The one who knows the Materia Medica applies it in its breadth and its Iength, and sees in it that which is similar. Ignatia has quivering in the limbs. Nervous, tremulous excitement.
"Weakness of the body coming on suddenly. Hysterical debility and fainting fits. Fainting in a crowd." It is especially useful in the tearful, nervous, sad, yielding, sensitive minds. "Jerking and twitching- Convulsive twitchings." Children are convulsed -in sleep after Punishment. "Convulsions in children in the first period of dentition. Spasms in children from fright." The child is cold and pale, and hasa fixed staring look, like Gina. "Convulsions with loss of conscious_ ness. Violent convulsions. Tetanic convulsions. Tetanus after fright. Emotional chorea. After fright, or grief." Choreic girls. Emotional epilepsy, or epileptiform manifestations. Paralytic weakness. "Great mental emotion." Nursing; night watching. A loss of one arm with as perfect paralysis as if it had come from a cerebral haemorrhage. In a few hours this passes off, and the arm is as well as ever. That is a hysterical paralysis. "Numbness of one or the other arm. Tingling and prickling in the arm."
Ignatia is full of surprises. If you are well acquainted with sickness, well acquainted with pathological conditions and their manifestations, you are then able to say whether you should or should not be surprised. You are then able to say what is natural, what is common to sickness. In Ignatia you find what is unnatural, and what is unexpected. You see an inflamed joint, or an inflamed part where there is heat, redness, throbbing, and weakness; you will handle it with great care for fear it will be painful. Ordinarily you have a perfect right to expect it would be painful. But you find it is not painful, and sometimes ameliorated by hard pressure. Is not that a surprise? You look into the throat. It is tumid, inflamed, red; the patient complains of a sore throat and pain. Naturally you will not touch it with your tongue depressor for fear it will hurt. You have every reason to suppose that the swallowing of solids will be painful. But you ask the patient when the pain is present, and the patient will say: "When I am not swallowing anything solid." The pain is ameliorated by swallowing anything solid, by the pressure. It pains all other times.
Mentally, the patient does the most unaccountable and most unexpected things. Seems to have no rule to work by, no philosophy, no soundness of mind, and no judgment. The opposite of what would be expected, then, will be found. The patient is better lying on the painful side. Instead of increasing the pain, it relieves the pain. "Pain like a nail sticking into the side of the head." The only comfort that is felt is by lying upon it, or pressing upon it, and that makes it go away.
The stomach is just as strange in its indigestion. Some day or other you will have a queer patient, vomiting everything taken into the stomach, and you will have her try gentle food, a little toast, and the simplest possible things, because she has been vomiting for days and people begin to worry about it for fear she will starve to death. You try this, and you try that, and she can keep nothing down. Finally she says, "If I could only have some cole slaw and some chopped onions, I think I could get along all right." It is a hysterical stomach, and the patient eats some raw cabbage and some chopped onions, and from that time on she is well. Those strange things that are ordinarily hard to digest ameliorate the nausea rather than increase it. While milk and toast, and delicate things, and warm things, such as are usually taken, disturb the stomach and increase the nausea. Cold food is craved, and cold food will be digested when warm food will be disturbing and create indigestion.
The cough has similar features in it. An irritation will come in the throat, as a rule, that is why people cough. People cough from smarting in the larynx and trachea, from irritation, from tickling, and from a sensation of fullness or a desire to expel something, and this is better by coughing. But when the irritation in the larynx and trachea comes in the Ignatia patient you have the unexpected again; because the more she coughs the more the irritation to cough is observed, until the irritation is so great and the cough is so great that she goes into spasms. It has been known of an Ignatia patient, that the more she coughed the greater the irritation to cough, and she was drenched with sweat, sitting up in bed with her night-clothes drenched, gagging and coughing and retching, covered with sweat and exhausted. When you are called to the bedside of such a patient, don't wait. You cannot get her to stop coughing long enough to say anything to you about it, only you will see the cough has grown more violent; Ignatia stops it at once. Without any provocation whatever a spasmodic condition will come on in the larynx. Any little disturbance, a mental disturbance, a fright, or distress, or a grievance, will bring a young, sensitive woman home and to her bed, and she will go on with a spasm of the larynx. It is a laryngismus stridulus that can be heard all over the house. Ignatia stops it at once (Gelsemium, Moschus).
Nervous affections and troubles of all sorts come on at the menstrual period. The mind is always in a hurry, in a state of excitement. No one can do things rapidly enough. The memory is untrustworthy. The mind flies all to pieces. It is a sort of confusion. No longer able to classify the things that have been classically put into the mind. Cannot remember her music, and her rules, and her scholastic methods. They have all vanished, and she is in a state of confusion. She is a worn-out, nervous person.
Then come fancies, vivid fancies, that are like delirium. Without fever, without chill. Just after excitement. She -comes home from some great disturbance of her emotions, and goes into a state that, if looked upon, per se, would appear to be a delirium such as appears in a fever. But upon close examination it is not a delirium. It is a momentarily hysterical excitement of the mind, in which the balance is lost, and she talks about everything. Sees every manner of thing; it is a hysterical insanity, because after she rests or the next morning it has vanished. But these spells come oftener and oftener after they have once begun, and she gives way to them easier and easier, and, if they are not remedied, she becomes a lunatic, a confirmed mental wreck, so that excitement, grief, insanity, all intermingle together as cause and effect. These come first at the menstrual period, and then they come at other times, until they come from every little disturbance. Whenever she is crossed or contradicted. "She desires to be alone and to dwell on the inconsistencies that come into her life. Sits and sobs. At times she is taciturn; again, she prattles and is loquacious, and talks to herself." She comes into a state in a little while where she delights to bring on her fits and to make a scare. The natural hysteric is born with that, and Ignatia will do her no good. But when this is brought on from conditions described, Ignatia is of the greatest benefit. It runs closely along by the side of Hyoscyamus. "A feeling of continuous fright, or apprehensiveness that something is going to happen."
With all these mental states she has a feeling of emptiness in the stomach and abdomen. Emptiness and trembling. "Melancholy after disappointed love, with spinal symptoms." "Great grief after losing persons or objects very near. Trembling of the hands disturbs her very much in writing. Dread of every trifle." She goes into a state where she is utterly unable to undertake anything, even to write a letter to a friend.
The Ignatia patient is not one that has been a simpleton, or of a sluggish mind or idiotic, but one that has become tired, and brought into such a state from over-doing and from over-excitement. From going too much. If rather feeble in body, from too much social excitement. Our present social state is well calculated to develop a hysterical mind. The typical social mind is one that is always in a state of confusion. Asks questions, not waiting for the answer. A good many remedies have this state; a lack of concentration of mind, that is what it is, but this is a peculiar kind of lack of concentration of mind. Dread, fear, anxiety, weeping, run through the remedy. "Sensitive disposition; hyperacute." Overwrought; intense.
Ignatia has another thing: "Thinks she has neglected some duty." That is very much like Puts., Hell. and Hyos., only Aurum believes that she has committed a great wrong. "Thinks that she has neglected some duty." Dwells upon that much. "Melancholy after great grief."
It is full of headaches, and they are all congestive, pressing headaches, or tearing headaches, or headaches as if a nail were sticking into the side of the head or temple; ameliorated from lying upon it. The headaches are all ameliorated by heat. The patient generally is ameliorated by warmth and aggravated by cold. Wants cold things in the stomach, but warm things externally. Jerking headaches, throbbing headaches, congestive headaches. Headaches in nervous and sensitive temperaments. Those whose nervous system has given way to anxiety, grief or mental work. "Headaches from abuse of coffee, from smoking, from inhaling smoke, from tobacco or alcohol." Headache from close attention. "Headache ameliorated by warmth and rest; worse, from cold winds and turning the head suddenly; worse when pressing at stool, or from jar, from hurrying, from excitement." Looking up increases the pain; moving the eyes; worse from noise, from light. "Pain in the occiput; worse from cold, better from external heat. Headache better while eating, but soon after it is worse."
"Disturbance of vision. Zigzags. Confusion of vision." Excessively nervous eyes. "Acrid tears. Weeping."
The face is distorted, convulsed, pale and sickly. Pains in the face. "Violent rending, tearing pains in the face." Let me put it this way: Some of these overwrought girls that come back from Paris, that I described, overworked in their music, will have violent face-ache, pains in the face, or some other hysterical pains. Others will come back with violent headaches; others with the mental state and confusion; others with all the hysterical manifestations. Prolonged excitement. Musical excesses. Yes, other girls come back fairly crippled with painful menstruation, ovarian pains, hysterical conditions, displacement; prolapsus of the vagina and of the rectum. "Tearing, shooting pains upwards from the anus and vagina up into the body towards the umbilicus."
Strange antipathies rim through the remedy. It will be impossible for you to ever form any conclusion what one of these sensitive women will think of any proposition-that is presented. You cannot depend upon her being reasonable or rational. It is best to say as little as possible about anything. Make no promises, listen, look wise take up your traveling bag and go home after you have prescribed, because anything you say will be distorted. There is not anything you can say that will please.
Thirst when you would not expect it. Thirst during chill, but none during the fever, if she has a feverish state. It is suitable in intermittent fever. Excitable, nervous children and women with intermittent fever.
IODINE
This remedy, in all of its complaints whether acute or chronic, has a peculiar kind of anxiety that is felt both in mind and body. It seems also that this state of anxiety is attended with a thrill that goes throughout his frame unless he removes it by motion or change of position. The anxiety comes on when trying to keep still, and the more he tries to keep still the more the anxious state increases. While attempting to keep still, he is overwhelmed with impulses, impulses to tear things, to kill himself, to commit murder, to do violence. He cannot keep still and so he walks night and day. This remedy carries the same feature with it into the Iodide of Potassium, so that it makes the Iodide of Potassium patient walk. But there is this difference, the Kali iod. patient can walk long distances without fatigue, and the walking only seems to wear off his anxiety, whereas in Iodine there is great exhaustion; he becomes extremely exhausted from walking and sweats copiously even from slight exertion. Iodine corresponds to those cases in which it seems that there is some dreadful thing coming on; the mind threatens to give out. Insanity threatens, or the graver forms of disease are threatening, such as are present in the advanced stages of suppressed malaria, in old cases of chills, in threatened phthisis, especially abdominal.
Hypertrophy runs through the remedy. There is enlargement of the liver, spleen, ovaries, testes, lymphatic glands, cervical glands, of all the glands except the mammary glands. The mammae dwindle while all other glands become enlarged, nodular and hard. This enlargement of the glands is especially observed among the lymphatic glands of the abdomen, the- mesenteric glands.
There is this peculiar circumstance also in Iodine, viz., that while the body withers the glands enlarge. That is peculiar and will enable you to think of Iodine, because the glands grow in proportion to the dwindling of the body and the emaciation of the .limbs. We find this state in marasmus. There is withering throughout the body, the muscles shrink, the skin wrinkles and the face of the child looks like that of a little old person, but the glands under the arms, in the groin and in the belly are enlarged and .hard. The mesenteric glands can be felt as knots. We see the same tendency hi old cases of malaria coming from the allopaths in which Quinine and Arsenic have been extensively used and the chills have kept on; the face and the upper part of the body are withered, the skin looks shriveled and yellow; a diarrhoea has come on, the liver and spleen are enlarged and the lymphatic glands of the belly can be felt. Even in the earlier stages, when these states are only threatening, we may look forward and see that the case is progressing toward an Iodine state.
Now take a patient that is suffering from intermittent fever brought on from malaria, or damp cellars. The patient grows increasingly hot; it is not always a febrile heat, but a sensation of heat; he wants to be bathed in cold water, wants the face and body cooled by cold sponging; he suffocates and coughs in a warm room, dreads heat, sweats easily and easily becomes exhausted. It is in this kind of a constitution that acute complaints will come on, such as acute inflammatory conditions of the mucous membranes and gastritis, inflammation of the liver, inflammation of the spleen, diarrhoea, croup, inflammation of the throat. The throat even becomes covered with white spots and is tumid and red, and this extends down into the larynx; it may even have a deposit upon it like diphtheria. Iodine has cured diphtheria, when the exudation resembling the diphtheria exudations was present in the stool. A constitution tending this way may bring on croup with an exudate, and we can see that it is going towards Iodine. In every region of the body peculiar little things come out. If we do not see to the full extent the constitution of the remedy, we will not recognize the tendency of the patient when progressing unfavorably.
The mental state of this patient is that of excitement, anxiety, impulses, melancholy; he wants to do something, wants to hurry; he has impulses to kill. In this it is very closely related to Arsenicum and Hepar. The Arsenicum and Hepar patients also have impulses to commit murder without being offended and without cause. The sensitiveness to heat will at once decide, for while Iodine is warm-blooded the Arsenicum and Hepar patients are always chilly. The impulse to do violence is sudden. There are remedies that have peculiar impulses, impulses without any cause. These impulses are seen in cases of impulsive insanity; an insanity in which there is an impulse to do violence and strange things, and when the patient is asked why he does these things he says he does not know. The patient may not be known to be insane in anything else; he may be a good business man. Remedies also have this. These things are forerunners. It is recorded under Hepar that a barber had an impulse to cut the throat of his patron with the razor while shaving him. The Nux vomica patient has an impulse to throw her child into the fire, or to kill her husband whom she dearly loves. The thought comes into her mind and increases until she becomes actually insane and beyond control and the impulse is carried into action. A Natrum sulph. patient will say, "Doctor, you do not know how I have to resist killing myself. An impulse to do it comes into my mind." Iodine has the impulse to kill, not from anger, not from any sense of justice, but without any cause. An overwhelming anger is often a cause for violence but the impulses are not of that sort in Iodine. While reading or thinking placidly at times a patient may have an impulse to do himself violence, and this finally grows until the end is a form of impulsive insanity.
The Iodine patient becomes weak in mind as well as in body; he is forgetful, cannot remember the little things, they pass out of the mind. He forgets what he was about to say or do; goes off and leaves packages he has purchased. The forgetfulness is extensive. But with all these states, do not forget one thing, that the patient is compelled to keep doing something in order to drive away his impulses and anxiety. The anxiety is wearing and distressing unless he keeps busy. Though mentally prostrated, he is compelled to keep busy and to continue the work, which increases the prostration of mind. You tell a man who is threatened with softening of the brain, from overwork, from anxiety and labor in literary work, "You must stop working, you must rest." "Why," he will say, "If I do I would die or go mad." Such a state comes under Iodine and Arsenicum, but there is one grand distinction by which the two remedies are seen to part company at once. The Iodine patient is warm-blooded, wants a cool place to move in, and to think in, and to work in, whereas the Arsenicum patient wants heat, wants a warm room, wants to be warmly clothed, and suffers from the cold. Iodine suffers from the heat. So that while the restlessness and anxiety, which are both of body and mind in each remedy, loom up before the mind as one, if the patient is a hot-blooded patient we would never think of Arsenicum; if a cold-blooded and shivering patient we would never think of Iodine.
Among the generals we first mentioned was the tendency to enlarged glands. Iodine has often cured a group of symptoms coming in the constitution that I have named, viz.; enlargement of the heart, enlargement of the thyroid and protruding eyeballs. Now, if you have one of these patients (suppose it has been sent to you by somebody who knows no better than to call it exophthalmic goitre), those things that are so essential to the name of the disease, as they call it, would not be an indication for the remedy, but the indications would be found among those circumstances that I have given you that are outside of the projection of the eyes, the enlargement of the thyroid, the hypertrophy of the heart and the cardiac disturbances. If the patient is emaciated, is sallow, suffers from heat, has enlarged glands, and the other symptoms of this medicine, you may expect after its administration an ultimate cessation of the group of symptoms that are selected to name the disease by.
Brain troubles, acute and chronic, sometimes call for Iodine. The head throbs, the body throbs, there are pulsations all over, and the throbbing extends to the finger ends and the toes; throbbing in the pit of the stomach, heavy pulsations felt in the arms, pulsations in the back, throbbing in the temporal bone. There are congestive headaches with violent pain. The head pains are aggravated from motion, but the patient is relieved from motion. The patient moves because his anxiety is relieved by motion, but every motion increases the head pains and the pulsation. Such distinctions are necessary. To distinguish between what is predicated of the patient and what is predicated of a part is an essential in the study of the Materia Medica. Everything that is predicated of the patient is general, everything that is predicated of a part is particular. The two may be opposite, and hence the student of the Materia Medica will sometimes be worried because he will find aggravation from motion and relief from motion recorded under the same remedy. It is only from the sources of the Materia Medica, i. e., the provings, and from the administration of the remedy that we may observe what is true of a part and what is true of the whole. We find at times a patient wants to be in a hot room with the head out of the window for relief of the head. In that case the head is relieved from cold and the body is relieved from heat. This is a typical symptom of Phosphorus, which has relief from cold as to the head and stomach symptoms, but aggravation from cold as to its chest and body symptoms. So, if the Phosphorus patient has vomiting and head symptoms, he says: "I want to go out in the open air and I want to take cold things into my stomach;" but if he has chest symptoms and pain in the extremities, he says: "I want to go into the house and keep warm." And just as we see this in patients it is so in the study of a remedy; we must discriminate.
As you may expect, all sorts of eye troubles are present in this debilitated constitution. The so-called scrofulous affections of the eyes, with ulceration of the cornea, catarrhal troubles, discharge from the eyes, enlargement of the little glands of the lids, come along with the emaciation and yellow countenance in the constitution described. Optical illusions in bright colors. An oedematous state is in keeping with Iodine. There is oedematous swelling of the lids and oedematous swelling of the face under the eyes Iodine has also oedema of the hands and feet, and carries this tendency with it into the Iodide of Potassium, which has oedematous swellings like those we find in kidney affections. It is capable of putting a stop to cases of Bright's disease in the early stages.
Another grand feature that runs through the complaints of Iodine is hunger. He is always hungry. The eating of the ordinary and regular meals is not sufficient. He eats between meals and yet is hungry. Moreover the complaints are better after eating. All the fears, the anxiety and distress of Iodine increase when he is hungry. There is pain in the stomach when the stomach is empty, and he is driven to eat. While eating he forgets his complaints, because it is like doing something, it is like moving, his mind is upon something else. He is relieved while eating and he is relieved while in motion. In spite of the hunger and much eating he still emaciates. "Living well yet growing thin," was one of Hering's key-notes of Iodine. As in Natr. mur. and Abrotanum, he emaciates while he has at the same time an enormous appetite. The nutrition is so disturbed that there is no making of flesh, and hence the emaciation.
The catarrhal condition of the nose is worthy of notice. The Iodine patient has loss of the sense of smell. The mucous membrane is thickened; he takes cold upon the slightest provocation; is always sneezing, and has from the nose a copious watery discharge. Ulceration in the nose with bloody crusts; he blows blood from the nose. The nose is stuffed up so that he cannot breathe through it. This increases every time he takes cold, and he is continually taking cold, hence he becomes a confirmed subject of catarrh. I have described the general state. The patient is the first to be thought of. His constitution is the first thing to know, i. e., what is true of the patient as a whole. After that we can find out what is true of each of his parts. The mucous membrane of the nose is constantly in a state of ulceration, or has a tendency to ulceration. Sometimes these little ulcers are deep.
There are aphthous patches along the tongue and throughout the mouth. The whole buccal cavity is studded with aphthous patches. I have mentioned already the tendency to exudation; white velvety, or white-greyish or pale ash-colored exudations come upon the sore throat, all over the mucous membrane of the nose and all over the pharynx. The pharynx seems to be lined with the velvety, ash- colored appearances. With these throat symptoms and the tendency to ulceration it has a wide range of usefulness in throat affections. It is useful in enlargement of the tonsils when the tonsils are studded with exudations and in the constitution described. Enlarged tonsils in hungry, withered patients. We often see one who is subject to quinsy progressing toward the Iodine state. He is always suffering from the heat like a Pulsatilla patient; at times in the earlier stages, before any organic changes have taken place, you may mistake Iodine for Pulsatilla. But if you watch the patient you will observe the tendency to emaciation and see that the two remedies soon part company. They are both hot, they are both irritable, they are both full of notions. The Pulsatilla patient is far more whimsical, more tearful, has greater sadness, and has constant loss of appetite, while the Iodine subject wants to eat much. The Pulsatilla patient often increases in flesh, although growing increasingly nervous. The Iodine patient becomes thin, has a ravenous hunger, cannot be satisfied, suffers from his hunger; he must eat every few hours and feels better after eating; he has also great thirst. If he goes long without eating, no matter what the complaints are, the suffering will increase. Any of the complaints of Iodine will likely be increased by fasting.
Iodine has also an indigestion that comes from overeating. The food sours, he is troubled with sour eructations, with much flatulence, with belching, with undigested stools, with diarrhoea, watery, cheesy stools, and he digests less and less. The digestion becomes more and more feeble until he digests almost nothing of what he eats, and yet the craving increases. He vomits and diarrhoea comes on and so he increasingly emaciates; because it is like burning the candle at both ends. It is not surprising that he is extremely weak, because he is assimilating very little of what he takes. The articles of food act as foreign substances to disorder his bowels and stomach. Now, with this trouble going on, the liver and spleen become hard and enlarged, and the patient becomes jaundiced. The stool is hard, lumpy and white, or colorless, or clay colored, sometimes soft and pappy; there seems to be little or no bile in it. This stage gradually increases until hypertrophy of the liver comes on. Finally the abdomen sinks in and reveals this enlargement of the liver and the enlarged lymphatic glands. These are very knotty and as hard as in tabes mesenterica. Iodine is indicated in the tubercular condition of the mesenteric glands with diarrhoea, emaciation, great hunger, great thirst, withering of the - mammary glands, a dried beef-like or shriveled appearance of the skin and sallow complexion. If the remedy is given early enough, before the structural changes have occurred, it will check the progress of the disease and cure.
This is a very useful remedy in the chronic morning diarrhoea of emaciated, scrofulous children. When the constitutional state is present it is primary to the varying kinds of stools that it is -possible for the patient to have. So if you have a marked state of the constitution, a case in which there are a great number of general symptoms for you to associate the remedy with, the little symptoms of the diarrhoea cease to be important. The constitutional state in that patient is that which is "strange, rare and peculiar." Almost any kind of diarrhoeic stool will be cured if the constitutional state is covered by the remedy. When it is an acute diarrhoea and it occurs in a vigorous constitution, and there is nothing but the diarrhoea, then it is necessary to know all the finer details, and the characteristics of the diarrhoea become the rare, "strange" and "peculiar" features.
Incontinence of urine in old people. In the male with all these constitutional symptoms Iodine is especially suited when the testes have dwindled, when there is impotency, when there is flowing of semen with dreams, when there is loss of sexual instinct or power, or with an irritated state, an erethism of the sexual instinct; also when the testes are enlarged and hard, indurated and hypertrophied like the other glands, or when there is an orchitis, an inflammation and enlargement of the testicles.
Swelling and induration of the uterus and ovaries. Iodine has cured tumors of the ovaries in such a constitution as I have described. It has cured the dwindling of the mammary glands and caused them to grow plump with an increase of flesh upon dwindling patients.
Its nature to produce the catarrhal state is illustrated in the leucorrhoea that it produces. Uterine leucorrhoea with swelling and induration of the cervix. Uterus enlarged, tendency to menorrhagia. Leucorrhoea rendering the thighs sore. The discharges of Iodine are acrid. The discharges from the nose excoriate the lip, the discharges from the eyes excoriate the cheek, the discharges from the vagina excoriate the thighs. The leucorrhoea is thick and slimy and sometimes bloody; "chronic leucorrhoea, most abundant at the time of the menses, rendering the thighs sore and corroding the linen."
This remedy has a cough that is violent; it has grave and severe difficulties of respiration, dyspnoea, with chest symptoms. Croupy, suffocating cough in this delicate constitution. Again we say if you do not hold in mind the constitutional state while reading these very numerous respiratory symptoms, you will not be able to apply- them because they are extensive and include a great many so-called Complaints and would give you difficulty in individualizing them.
Now, there is one more complaint that I wish to call your attention to. In old gouty constitutions, with enlargment of the joints, the history is that the patients were once in a good state of flesh, but they have become lean, and although they are hungry, the food does not seem to do them good. The joints are enlarged and tender. Many gouty constitutions want a warm room, but the Iodine patient wants a cool room. His joints pain and are aggravated from the warmth of bed. He cheers up in a cool place and likes to be in the open air. He is growing increasingly weak; he is generally ameliorated on moving about and eating, he has the anxiety of body and mind. Iodine will put a check on his gouty attacks and cause him to go on comfortably for a while.
KALI BICHROMICUM
This remedy is recognized by most physicians by the copious ropy mucous discharges from all mucous membranes, but it is also a most important remedy in rheumatic affections of the joints with swelling, heat and redness, whenever these conditions wander around from joint to joint. The bones all over the body feel bruised, and caries is reckoned among its symptoms. A marked feature of this remedy is the alternation between catarrhal symptoms and rheumatic pains. Exudations from mucous membranes, somewhat like croup, are found in the larynx, trachea and in the rectum. It is not surprising, therefore, that it has proved a very effective remedy in diphtheria. It emaciates, like the rest of the Kali salts. We have running through it the cachectic conditions, or malignant diseases with ulceration; and especially is it indicated when the ulceration period is present. Ulceration is a striking feature of this remedy. Its ulcers are deep; are said to be as if punched out and are very red. Gouty conditions are as common in this remedy as in the other Kalis. It is especially like Causticum with its cracking in the joints. Syphilitic conditions have been cured in the most advanced stages. It has the sharp stitching pains like Kali carb. It has one feature quite its own very severe pain in small spots that could be covered by the end of the thumb. It has wandering pains from place to place, and wandering rheumatism from joint to joint. There are pains in all parts. Pains are sometimes very violent; sometimes shooting; sometimes stitching, stinging; again aching. Burning is a very marked symptom of the remedy. The pains appear rapidly and disappear suddenly.
The patient is sensitive to cold. There is a lack of vital heat. In fact, he wants to be wrapped up and covered warmly, and many of his complaints are much better when he is perfectly warm in bed. All the pains and his cough are relieved from the warmth of the bed, and yet there are other complaints, like rheumatic, conditions, that come on in hot weather. The cough is better in warm weather and worse in winter. Catarrhal conditions of the larynx and trachea are worse in winter, especially in the cold, damp weather, like Cale. phos., when the snow melts. Sensitive to cold winds. Causticum, it will be remembered, is sensitive to cold, dry winds. The Kalis generally are sensitive to cold, dry weather, but Kali bichromicum throat troubles are continuous in the winter and during cold, damp weather, and are worse in cold, damp winds. It is a most useful remedy in septic and zymotic fevers. Many of its symptoms are aggravated about 2 or 3 A. M., like Kali carb. Most of the symptoms are worse in the morning, yet some come on in the night. A marked feature of Kali bichromicum is a feeling of great weakness and weariness. When the pain has passed off, if in the limbs, the limbs are left very weary. Great prostration and cold sweat. It has neuralgia every day at the same hour, showing its periodicity. Like the rest of the Kalis it has cured epilepsy. Ropy saliva and mucous discharges from the mouth during the convulsion has led to its use in epilepsy. The symptoms generally, especially the pains, are worse from motion, except the sciatic and some of the pains in the lower limbs, which are better from motion. The patient pulsates all over the body.
There are very few mental symptoms owing to the fact that the remedy has been proved only in crude form. It needs to be proved in potencies to bring out the mental symptoms.
It has violent headaches, and its headaches are mostly associated with catarrhal conditions. A Kali bichromicum patient always suffers more or less from catarrh of the nose, and if he is exposed to cold weather the catarrhal condition will turn to dryness; then will come on violent headache; also headaches during coryza. Headaches during coryza when the discharge of the coryza slacks up a little. Headaches often begin with dim vision. Pains are violent. Headaches are better from warmth, especially warm drink; better from pressure; worse from stooping; worse from motion and walking; worse at night and still much worse in the morning. Pain is pulsating, shooting and burning. Headaches come on with vertigo. Headaches are often one-sided. It has been a very useful remedy in syphilitic head pains. Pains over the eyes and in the forehead. It is very useful when the headaches are with retching and vomiting; when the pain is confined to the very small spot that could be covered with the thumb and is violent; when the headaches come periodically and with dizziness. Headaches are somewhat ameliorated in open air if it is not too cold.
It has cured eczema of the scalp with thick, heavy crests from which ooze a yellow, thick, gluey substance.Daylight brings on photophobia. There are sparks before the eyes; dim vision before the headache, as mentioned above. Rheumatic conditions affecting the eyes, hence it is said rheumatic affections of the eyes. Granular lids. Ulceration of the cornea. The ulcer is deep with pulsation in it. The eyes are much inflamed and read. The lids are red and swollen. Eyes and lids are injected.
Croupous inflammation of the eyes. Burning and itching in the eyes. Inflammation of the mucous membrane of the eyes with copious flow of thick mucus. Margins of the lids are red and swollen. It has cured polypus on the conjunctiva, swelling of the lids and stringy mucus.
There are yellow, viscid discharges from the ears, with stitching pains and pulsating in the ears. Chronic suppuration of the middle ear with perforated t tympanum; eczematous eruptions on the ears; itching of the whole external ear.
The symptoms of the nasal passages are very numerous. The most prominent are the catarrhal symptoms. It has catarrhal symptoms both acute and chronic, with copious, thick, viscid, yellow or white mucus. Foetid odor from the nose. Troubled much with a sensation of dryness in the nose. Loss of smell, and the nose is obstructed nights with thick yellow mucus, too viscid to be blown out. Accompanying this catarrhal condition there is a hard pain at the root of the nose. Ulcers form all over the nasal mucous membrane. There are ulcers, crusts, mucous plugs; must blow the nose constantly without success, but finally blows out large green crusts or scabs from high up in the nose. Sometimes they are drawn into the posterior nares. There is burning and pulsating in the nasal cavities. When the nasal cavity is in this state of ulceration and catarrh there is shooting pain from the root of the nose to the external angle of the eye through the whole forenoon. Extreme soreness inside of the nose. Expired air feels hot and causes a sensation of burning. He has snuffles and increased catarrhal conditions in damp weather. There are also burning, excoriating, watery discharges from the nose, as in acute catarrhal conditions. Coryza is fluent, excoriating, with loss of smell. With the chronic condition there comes perforation of the septum with pressing pains of the frontal sinus. A very strange condition then is observed. Scabs form upon the nasal septum; when these are removed there comes photophobia, then dimness of vision, followed by hard frontal headache. The septum is sometimes destroyed by ulceration. Much thick blood is blown out of the nose. Now, it has cured these conditions when they were syphilitic. It has cured nasal Polypus. It has cured lupus of the nose.
The bones of the face are often very sore, with shooting pains in the malar bones. Pain in the malar bones on coughing. With the catarrhal conditions there is much suffering from the malar bones, like Merc. It has cured lupus exedens. It has cured ulceration of the lip. p wollen parotid is quite a common feature in its proving. It has cured impetigo.
The tongue is smooth, shiny, sometimes cracked. This is especially observed in low forms of fever, like typhoid. The tongue is often coated, thick and yellow at the base. Papillae raise on the dorsum of the tongue, making it look like strawberry tongue. Again, the tongue is coated a thick brown. The provers seemed to be much annoyed by a sensation of a hair on the base of the tongue. It has produced and cured ulceration of the tongue; even when syphilitic it is a useful remedy. Ulcers deep as if punched out with stinging pains.
There is great dryness of the mouth; ropy saliva and mucus; ulcers anywhere in the mouth; aphthous patches; ulcers of the roof of the mouth; even when these are syphilitic it is a most useful remedy; deep, punched out ulcers.
The throat symptoms are very numerous. I will only mention a few of the most characteristic ones. Inflammation of the throat in general, involving all the tissues in it, extending up into the nose, and down into the larynx, even with a high degree of ulceration with copious, ropy mucus. It has cured diphtheritic exudation in the throat when it is confined to the throat, and also when it has extended to the larynx. A marked feature of the Kali bichromicum throat is its oedematous uvula. This symptom is also found in Apis, Kali i., Lach., Mur. ac., Nit. ac., Phos., Sulph. ac., and Tab. Deep ulcers in the throat and ulcers on the tonsils. Ulceration so extensively that it has destroyed the whole soft palate. Inflammation of the tonsils when they are swollen and very red, when the neck is swollen; inflammation of the tonsils with suppuration. In this sore throat there is quite commonly a shooting pain extending to the ears. There are also enlarged veins in the throat. Like the sensation of the tongue as if a hair in various places in the fauces and nose. Dry, burning sensation in the throat is very common. Quite a characteristic symptom of Kali bichromicum is the intense pain in the root of the tongue, when putting the tongue out. It has much exudation in the throat that is not diphtheria, but resembles it.
The stomach symptoms are also very numerous. There is aversion to meat, and, strange to say, he craves beer, which makes him sick, brings on diarrhoea. Food lies like a load in the stomach; digestion seems suspended; there is a pressure as of a load after eating and much foetid eructation. Nausea comes on very suddenly, sometimes while eating, soon after eating; vomits all food and it is sour- as if it had turned sour very rapidly; so that there is vomiting of sour, undigested food, bile, bitter mucus, blood, yellow mucus and ropy mucus. It is a very useful remedy in nausea and vomiting of drunkards and beer drinkers. When a beer drinker has arrived at a point where he can no longer tolerate his beer but it makes him sick, Kali bichromicum is a useful remedy. In the stomach there is also soreness and coldness. It is a very useful remedy in ulceration of the stomach; and when such ulcer is cancerous it relieves the pain, stops the vomiting, makes the patient comfortable for a long time. In other words, it palliates him. There are some pains in the stomach that are ameliorated by eating; nausea sometimes is ameliorated, but such is the exception. He has a faintness in the stomach which drives him to eat often. Chronic catarrh of the stomach is a strong feature and perhaps is a condition that is generally present with Kali bichromicum patients.
There is pain in the liver, hard contracting pain extending to the shoulder, resembling Crot. h. Pain in the liver from motion. Dull, aching pain in the liver. It is a useful remedy in liver conditions associated with gall stones. It corrects the action of the liver so that healthy bile is formed and the gall stones are dissolved. Stitching pain in the liver, and also in the spleen, on motion.
The abdomen is very tympanitic, with tenderness. There are stitching, cutting pains. Sinking in the abdomen with nausea after eating, then comes vomiting, then comes diarrhoea. This is the order in which these symptoms generally appear. It is a very useful remedy in gastro-intestinal cases. Ulcers of the intestines in typhoid conditions. This remedy has also a morning diarrhoea like Sulphur. It has diarrhoea in phthisis. It has diarrhoea in typhoid fever. Watery stools. Stools are brown and watery, or may be blackish watery. There is often much tenesmus at stool. Chronic diarrhoea in the morning. Diarrhoea after beer like Aloe, China, Gamb., Lyc., Mur. ac., and Sulph.
Frequently there are clay colored stools. Again there are bloody stools, as in dysentery. It has both diarrhoea and dysentery after rheumatism has disappeared. It seems rheumatic conditions are inclined to alternate with diarrhoeic conditions. In hot weather it has diarrhoea and dysentery; in winter it has chest troubles and catarrh of the air passages. There is pain in the abdomen before the stool; much pain during the stool, cramping and tenesmus. After stool it has tenesmus like Merc. It has constipation with hard, knotty stool, followed by severe burning in the parts. Burning in the anus after stool. Prolapsus of the rectum. After dry hard stool there is burning in the rectum. Patient suffers from a sensation of a large plug in the rectum and there is great soreness in the anus. He suffers much from haemorrhoids which protrude after stool and are very painful.
Pain in the back with bloody urine. Shooting pains in the region of the kidneys, also aching in the region of the kidneys with urging to urinate in the day time. There is suppressed urine with aching in the kidneys. Ropy mucus in the urine. Pain in the coccyx before urination, relieved afterwards. Burning in the fossa navicularis during urination.
In the male the sexual desire is generally absent. There is a strong constricting or contracting pain in the end of the penis and much itching of the pubes. Deep punched out chancres, very hard. Stitching in the prostate gland when walking. Ropy, viscid, mucous discharge from the urethra.
As there is much relaxation in the remedy during hot weather it especially affects the woman. She suffers from prolapsus in the summer time, during hot weather. It is a very useful remedy in the woman for subinvolution. In the menstrual flow there are often membranes that cause her to suffer. The menstrual flow is too soon, excoriates the parts, causes the labia to swell and itch. Like the catarrhal conditions of other mucous membranes, there is leucorrhoea that is yellow and ropy. It has been a most useful remedy in the vomiting of pregnancy when the other symptoms agree and also where the milk becomes stringy.
There are numerous symptoms connected with the larynx and as is usual copious, thick, ropy mucus. Chronic hoarseness, rough voice, dry cough, swollen feeling in the larynx and sensation as if there was a rag in the larynx. Catarrh of the larynx, croup, cough when breathing, membranous croup, diphtheria, burning, smarting and rawness of the larynx, rattling in the trachea. Now these symptoms come in the cold, damp weather, in the winter. They are associated with much coughing and uneasiness. Sometimes these symptoms are entirely relieved and he is comfortable in a warm bed at night; and he is worse always in cold weather; they come on when the cold weather comes in the fall and last all winter. He has much wheezing when breathing; tightness at the bifurcation of the trachea. Quite a characteristic pain in the chest is the pain from the sternum to the back, associated with catarrhal conditions and with cough. Cough is caused from tickling in the larynx and at the bifurcation; dry, frequent, hard cough; great soreness in the chest when coughing and deep breathing. Cough with pain in the sternum through to the back. Cough with stitching pain in the chest. Loud, hard cough. When he wakes up in the morning he begins this hard coughing. He is often ameliorated by lying down and is ameliorated
by the warm bed; is worse undressing, from exposure to the air, worse after eating, aggravated by taking a deep breath, ameliorated by getting warm in bed. The irritation and the cough is increased very much by exposure to cold air. The cough is also a choking cough at times; sometimes a hoarse cough. It is sometimes much like whooping cough, spasmodic and constrictive.
The expectoration connected with the chest cough is ropy, yellow, or yellowish green, sometimes bloody; sometimes expectorates quantities of clotted blood. There is much rattling in the chest, catarrhal conditions in the winter, last all winter, with rattling catarrhal conditions in old people, rattling in the chest.
It is a most useful remedy in phthisis and hemorrhages from the lungs and cavities in the lungs. There is a cold sensation in the chest which is generally felt in the region of the heart. There is a pressure in the chest after eating also near the heart or supposed to be about the heart and there is palpitation. It has cured and been a very useful remedy in hypertrophy of the heart with palpitation.
In all parts of the body there is chilliness, in the back, especially in the back of the neck. Stabbing pains in the neck and in the dorsal region. Sharp pains in the region of the kidneys. Dullache in the back. Many of the symptoms in the back are of a rheumatic character and wander from place to place. The rheumatic pains are worse stooping, and, like other pains, worse from motion. An exception to this is in the sacrum where there is an aching pain at night when lying and is better in the day time on motion. There is pain in the sacrum on straightening up from sitting. Pain in the coccyx from rising after sitting; pain in the coccyx on first sitting down and in the act of sitting down.
The limbs are stiff in the morning on rising and the pains wander about, especially in the joints. Rheumatic pains that wander about. Pains in the limbs are worse from cold and worse from motion. They are better from heat and better in rest. Periodical pains, coming at regular times. The bones feel sore to the touch or on deep pressure. There is cracking in the joints. Rheumatic pains are very common in the shoulders; lameness; there is burning in the forearms; rheumatic pains in the elbows; weak feeling in the hands and fingers with much clumsiness; spasmodic contraction of the fingers. Bones in the hands and fingers feel bruised and- very tender to hard pressure. Rheumatic pains of the fingers are very common to this remedy. In the lower limbs we have marked rheumatic pains through the hips and lames, worse walking and on motion. Then comes the exception: pains in the sciatic nerves,-very severe, worse in hot weather; these are better in motion, better in the warmth of the bed, worse from changes in the weather and better on flexing the leg. Drawing pains in the tibia are very common. It has cured ulcers on the legs, deep as if punched out. Burning on the ankles, soreness of the heels. It has cured ulcers on the heels.
The sleep is most restless. Starting in sleep and turning and tossing. Its chest symptoms are worse on walking. Upon the skin we have pustules, boils, eczema, blisters, herpes, shingles, ulcers on the skin, tubercles, suppurating tubercles and eruptions that are syphilitic in character.
KALI CARBONICUM
The Kali carb. patient is a hard patient to study, and the remedy itself is a hard one to study.
It is not used as often as it should be, and the reason is that it is a very complex and confusing remedy. It has a great many opposite symptoms, changing symptoms, and thus it is related to patients that withhold their symptoms and have many vague symptoms.
The patient is whimsical, irascible, irritable to the very highest degree, quarrels with his family and with his bread and butter. He never wants to be alone, is full of fear and imaginations when alone "fear of the future, fear of death, fear of ghosts." If compelled to remain alone in the house he is wakeful, sleepless, or his sleep is full of horrible dreams. He is never at peace, is full of imaginations and fear. "What if the house should burn up!" "What if I should do this or that" and "What if this and the other thing should happen !"
He is oversensitive to everything, sensitive to every atmospheric change; he can never get the room at just exactly the right temperature; he is sensitive to every draft of air and to the circulation of air in the room. He cannot have the windows open, even in a distant part of the house. He will get up at night in bed and look around to see where that draft of air comes from. His complaints are worse in wet weather, and in cold weather. He is sensitive to the cold and is always shivering. His nerves feel the cold; they are all painful when it is cold. The neuralgias shoot here and there when it is cold, and if the part affected be kept warm the pain goes to some other place. All his pains change place and go into the cold part; if he covers up one part, the pain goes to the part uncovered.
This remedy is full of sticking, burning, tearing pains, and these fly around from place to place. Of course Kali carb. has pains that remain in one place, but usually the pains fly around in every direction. Pains cutting like knives. Pains like hot needles, sticking, stinging and burning. These pains are felt in internal parts and dry passages. Burning in the anus and rectum, described as if a hot poker were forced into that passage; burning as with fire. The haemorrhoids burn like coals of fire. The burning of Kali carb. is like that of Arsenicum.
Again from studying the text it will be seen that it is a common feature of this medicine to have its symptoms come on at 2, 3 or 5 o'clock in the morning. In Kali carb. the cough will come or have its greatest < at three or four or five o'clock in the morning. The febrile state will occur from 3-5 in the morning. The patient, who is subject to asthmatic dyspnoea, will have an attack at 3 o'clock in the morning, waking him out of sleep. He will wake up with various symptoms and remain awake until 5 o'clock in the morning, and after that to a great extent they are relieved. Of course, there are plenty of sufferings at any time in the twenty-four hours, but this is the worst time. He wakes up at 3 o'clock in the morning with fear, fear of death, fear of the future, worries about everything and is kept awake for 2-3 hours and then goes to sleep and sleeps soundly.
His body is cold and requires much clothing to keep it warm, but in spite of the fact that he is cold he sweats copiously; copious, cold sweat upon the body. Sweats upon the slightest exertion, sweats where the pain is, sweat over the forehead; cold sweat on the forehead with headache.
Neuralgia of the scalp and the eyes and the cheek bones in association with the nervous shooting pains. Violent pains here and there in the head, as if the head would be crushed. Cutting and stabbing in the head. 'Violent congestive headaches as if the head were full. Head hot on one side and cold on the other; forehead covered with cold sweat.
It has catarrhal congestive headache. Whenever he goes out in the cold air, the nose opens up and the mucous membranes become dry and burn; when he returns into a warm room the nose commences to discharge, and the nose stuffs up so that he cannot breathe through it, and then he feels most comfortable; so that it has stuffing up of the nose in a warm room, and opening up of the nose in the open air.
When the nose is open so that he can breathe through it, that is the time the head is most painful; it is painful to the cold air and the cold air makes it burn. The cold air feels hot. All these patients suffer from a chronic catarrh and when they ride in the wind the catarrhal discharge ceases and then will come on a headache, and thus he has headache from riding in the cold wind. Whenever the discharge ceases from taking cold in a draft on comes headache, and as the discharge becomes free again the headache is relieved. Neuralgic pains in eyes and scalp and through the cheek bones from a cessation of chronic catarrhal discharge, and when the discharge starts up again, these pains cease.
With the chronic catarrh of the nose there is a thick, fluent, yellow discharge; dryness of the nose, alternating with stuffing up. The one who suffers from a chronic catarrh will also have the discharge in the morning, which will fill up the nose with yellow mucus. In the morning he blows out and hawks up dry, hard crusts that fill up the nasal passage, clear over into the pharynx and down into the throat. These crusts become dry as if they were partly formed upon the mucous membrane and when they are blown out there is bleeding. The bleeding starts from where the crusts are lifted up.
He is subject to sore throat, is always taking cold, and it settles in the throat. He is also subject to enlarged tonsils and with these has enlargement and chronic hardness of the parotid glands one or both. Great knots below the ear, behind the jaw. These grow and become hard, and at times painful; shooting, darting pains when he is moving about in the open air. When air strikes these enlarged glands they are sore and painful, and he is ameliorated by going into a warm place. The acute colds extend into the chest, but Kali carb. has been found most suitable in the chronic catarrh of the chest, chronic bronchitis.
The chest is very often affected in just the same way as the nose. There is the dryness and dry barking, hacking cough in cold air, but a copious expectoration of mucus when it becomes warm, and that is the time he is most comfortable, for the expectoration seems to relieve him. He suffers mostly from a dry, hacking cough with morning expectoration. The cough begins with a dry, hacking, increases gradually and sometimes very rapidly to a violent, spasmodic cough with gagging or vomiting, and when coughing it feels as if his head would fly to pieces. The face becomes puffed, the eyes seem to protrude and then there is seen that which is commonly present in Kali carb., a peculiar sort of a swelling between the eyelids and eyebrows that fills up when coughing. Your attention is called to that peculiar feature, for although there may be bloating nowhere else upon the face that little bagging will appear above the lid and below the eyebrow. It fills up sometimes to the extent of a little water bag. Such a swelling has been produced by Kali carb., and sometimes that symptom alone guides to the examination of the remedy for the purpose of ascertaining if Kali carb. does not fit all the rest of the case. Boenninghausen speaks of an epidemic of whooping cough in which the majority of cases called for Kali carb., and this striking feature was present. No remedy should ever be given on one symptom. If you are led to a remedy by a peculiar symptom, study the remedy and the disease thoroughly to ascertain if the two are similar enough to each other to expect a cure. Any deviation from that rule is ruinous and will lead to the practice of giving medicines on single symptoms.
Dry, hacking, incessant, gagging cough with whooping, blowing of blood from the nose, vomiting of everything in the stomach, and expectoration of blood-streaked mucus, is a whooping cough that will be commonly cured by Kali carb., but especially if there is present that peculiar and striking feature of a bag-like swelling below the eyebrow and above the lids, puffiness of the eyes.
There are some cases of pneumonia that need Kali carb., in the stages of hepatisation (like Sulp.). Again, when pneumonia has passed away think of Kali carb. if every time the patient takes a little cold it settles in the chest with these symptoms that I have described. There is sensitiveness of the body to weather changes, to cold aid and to wet, a continuous dry, hacking cough, with gagging, the aggravation from three to five in the morning, and the patient has flying neuralgic pains. These symptoms gradually increase and the patient dates them back to his pneumonia. He says: "Doctor, I have never been quite well since I had pneumonia." The catarrhal state has settled in his chest and there is a chronic tendency to take cold. These cases are threatening to go into phthisis and will hardly be likely to recover without Kali carb. In this tendency for catarrhal states to locate in the chest, Kali carb. should be thought of as well as Phosphor., Lycopod. and Sulphur.
Another general state that belongs to this remedy is a tendency to dropsies. It has dropsies all over the body. The feet bloat- and the fingers puff; the back of the hands pit upon pressure, the face looks puffy and waxy. The heart is weak. I can look back upon quite a number of cases of fatty degeneration of the heart in which I could have prevented all the trouble with Kali carb. if I had known the case better in the beginning. These cases are insidious, and the indications calling for Kali carb. must be seen early or the patient will - advance into an incurable condition. That peculiar. state of weakness and feeble circulation that finally ends in dropsy and many other complications have their likeness in Kali carb. There is an insidiousness about Kali- carb. in the approach of all of its complaints.
He has a sort of nondescript appearance, he is withered, has much dyspnoea upon going uphill or even walking on the level. Examination of the lungs shows them to be in very fair condition, but finally complications come on, there is a break down and organic changes and you look back over these cases and say, if I had only seen in the beginning of this case what I see now it seems as if the patient ought to have been cured. We learn the beginnings of remedies as we learn the beginnings of sicknesses. It is a prudent thing for a homoeopathic physician to glance back over a case that he has failed on, or someone else has failed on, to study its beginnings and see what the manifestations were. This kind of study to the homoeopathic physician is as delightful as post mortems are to the old school.
The teeth present a peculiar state. The gums take on a scorbutic or scrofulous character. The gums separate from the teeth and the teeth decay and become discolored and loose, so that they have to be extracted early in life. He suffers from pain in the teeth whenever he takes cold from riding in the wind and raw weather. The pains come on even when the teeth are not yellow or decayed; stitching, tearing, rending pains in the teeth. Offensive smell from the teeth; pus oozing out from around the teeth. The mouth is full of little ulcers, little aphthous patches. The mucous membrane is pale and ulcerates easily. The tongue is white with offensive taste; coated gray, with sick headaches.
While many of the symptoms of Kali carb. are aggravated after eating, some symptoms are relieved after eating. There is throbbing in the pit of the stomach when the stomach is empty. There is also throbbing all over the body, pulsation to the fingers and toes; there is no part that does not pulsate, and he is kept awake by this pulsation. Pulsation even when there is often no feeling of palpitation in the region of the heart. It has also violent palpitation of the heart.
Kali carb. fits many old dyspeptics. After eating he feels as if he would burst; so bloated is he. Great flatulence; belches wind up wards and passes flatus downwards; offensive flatus. The belching up is also attended with fluid eructations, sour fluids that set the teeth on edge; they excoriate, or cause smarting in the pharynx or mouth. Pain in the stomach after eating; burning in the stomach after eating. Gone feeling in the stomach, that is not even relieved by eating. A peculiar condition in Kali carb. is a state of anxiety felt in the stomach, as though it were a fear. One of the first patients I ever had expressed it in a better way than it is expressed in the books; she said, "Doctor, somehow or other I don't have a fear like other people do, because I have it in my stomach." She said when she was frightened, it always struck to her stomach. "If a door slams, I feel it right here" (epigastric region). Well, that is striking, that is peculiar. It was not long before I developed another feature of Kali carb. By a little awkwardness on my part my knee happened to hit the patient's foot as it projected a little over the edge of the bed, and the patient said, "Oh!" Sure enough that was Kali carb. again, for you will find in Kali carb. a patient that is afraid and everything goes to the stomach and when touched upon the skin there is an anxiety or fear or apprehension felt in the region of the stomach. You might imagine that it is connected with the solar plexus, but the symptom is the all in all to the physician. A Kali carb. patient is so sensitive in the soles of the feet that the mere touch of the sheet brings a sensation of thrill throughout the body. Hard pressure is all right, it does not disturb, but something that comes unawares excites. The Kali carb. patient is over sensitive to all the surrounding things, over sensitive to touch; shivering from the simplest and lightest touch, even when hard pressure is agreeable. Violently ticklish in the soles of the feet. I have often examined the feet when a patient would shiver and draw up the feet and scream out, "Don't tickle my feet." I had probably touched is so lightly that I did not know that I had touched it at all. In Lach. also gentle touch is painful, while hard pressure is agreeable, but here it is not so much the ticklishness. In Lach. the abdomen is so sensitive that the touch of the sheet is painful. I have seen Lach. patients using a hoop to keep a light sheet from touching the abdomen. You may know then that you are in the realm of Lachesis, and that it is like those persons who are unable to bear the slightest touch upon the neck and suffer from uneasiness on wearing a collar. All that, however, is different from this state of ticklishness. I have seen patients who are really so sensitive in the skin that I would not dare touch it; unless they knew just where I was going to touch. "Now I am going to feel your pulse, hold still." If I were to touch the hand, or reach out to-feel the pulse without warning there would be a thrill. Such a state is in keeping with Kali carb. These things often have to be dug out by observation in -studying the nature of provings, and associating things. These things that run into the oversensitive- ness of patients are of great value clinically. The capabilities of our Materia Medica are something wonderful, but they could be developed much more rapidly if a number of homoeopathic physicians would make application of the Materia Medica with accuracy and intelligence, observing what they see and relating it literally. At the present day there is only a very small number of homoeopathic physicians that can come together in a body and say things that are worth listening to, a shamefully small number when we consider the length of time Hahnemann's books have been before the world.
There are many old chronic liver subjects who talk about nothing else but the liver. Every time they go to the doctor's office ice they talk about the liver, and about a condition of fullness in the region of the liver and pain through the right shoulder blade and up through the right side of the chest, with a good deal of oppression and distension; vomiting of bile and a good deal of stomach disorder, fullness after eating; attacks of diarrhoea, alternating with constipation lasting for many days with great straining at stool. Periodical bilious attacks, when a constipated state is present; cannot lie down at night; difficult breathing at night or at 3 o'clock in the morning, especially when it is in a patient over-sensitive to cold, damp weather, one who wants to sit by the fire all the time. These liver subjects are often thoroughly cured by Kali carb. Sometimes they have been resorting to all sorts of liver tappings, taking such medicines as purge or cause vomiting, drugs that really aggravate the trouble. Kali carb. goes to the bottom of these cases, and roots out the evil.
In the abdomen we have many Kali carb. symptoms. Persons subjected to repeated attacks of colic, cutting pains, with distension, with pain after eating, constipation or diarrhoea. Colic, with cutting, tearing pains, doubling him up, coming on every little while. Tremendous flatulence. When the attack of colic is on it might remind you of Colocynth or of some other of the acute remedies that cure colic in two or three minutes, but you will find that these acute remedies that relieve colic so speedily when given the second or third time do not produce so marked an effect. You will find it necessary to hunt for an antipsoric, a remedy that will control the whole case. In the study of the colic alone during its attack you only get a one-sided view of the case, and after the colic is over (say he has been cured by Colocynth) you now study the patient and go over the case, and behold all the symptoms are covered by Kali carb. After giving that remedy you may expect that the patient will not have another attack. Such is the nature of Kali carb. It is deep-acting, long-acting, goes deep into the life. It cures conditions due to psora, or to the suppression of eruptions in childhood, or to the closing up of old ulcers and fistulous openings with a history of troubles ever since. All these wandering pains and the chilliness are again relieved by eruption, by the outbreak of discharges; by haemorrhages, by ulcers that eat in deep and flow freely and fistulous openings.
"Cutting in abdomen, as if torn to pieces." "Violent cutting, must sit bent over pressing with both hands, or lean far back for relief; cannot sit upright." "Cutting and drawing like false labor pains." There is great coldness with the pains, with the cutting in the abdomen; he wants heat, hot drinks, hot water bags. A chronic coldness is felt in the abdomen, cold externally and internally. It would sometimes be cruel to give a dose of Kali carb. when the colic is on, 'because if the remedy fitted the case constitutionally, if all the symptoms of the case were those of Kali carb., you would be likely to get an aggravation that would be unnecessary. There are plenty 'of short acting remedies that would relieve the pain speedily, and at the close of the attack the constitutional remedy could then be given. If the patient can bear the pain to the end, it is better to wait until it passes off without any medicine. That sometimes is cruel, and then the short acting medicines should be given. All recurrent troubles, those that come periodically, or after eating certain articles, or from exposure, or with a periodicity that belongs to time all these states are chronic; they are not acute troubles. They are simply a small portion of a chronic miasm, a side view, and all such cases must have a constitutional remedy sooner or later. You can, it is true, relieve violent pain at the first visit, but then you must look deeper and prevent your patient having more trouble. Otherwise, if you should give Bell. or Colocynth or any medicine that simply fits the colic, the trouble will come back again; you have not cured your patient; you have only palliated. But, on the other hand, you take such a colic as is described here and Kali carb. fits just these symptoms alone and does not fit the whole constitution of the patient. Then it is that a constitutional and long-acting remedy like Kali carb. acts in fullness. It does not take the usual long -time to act and is not attended with an aggravation.
"Abdominal muscles painful to touch; swelling of glands." In the abdomen, also, following troubles in the bowels, or following peritonitis, we have effusion into the peritoneal sac, which is usually associated with dropsy of the extremities, but not always. In liver dropsies especially is this remedy useful.
It has a great many complaints of the rectum and anus and of the stool. It has most persistent and enormous haemorrhoidal tumors that burn, that are extremely sensitive to touch, that bleed copiously, that are extremely painful, making it impossible for him to sleep. He is 'compelled to lie upon the back and hold the nates apart, because the pressure: is very painful to the external piles. The piles cannot be put back; there is great distension and swelling inside. Haemorrhoids that come out after stool and bleed copiously and are very painful; they must be pushed back, and long after going to bed they burn like fire. There is great aggravation from stool, which is hard and knotty and requires great straining to expel. Fistulae of the anus. Burning temporarily relieved by sitting in cold water.
It has chronic diarrhoea and also diarrhoea alternating with constipation. Many times where there are numerous particulars, we have to rely upon the generals that are characteristic of the remedy. The text gives much less of diarrhoea than has been developed by clinical uses. "Diarrhoea painless, with rumbling in the abdomen and burning at stool, only by day; chronic cases with puffiness under the eyebrows." a gives few symptoms, but it is a large and extensive remedy in diarrhoeas that are chronic. In old, broken down subjects, in weakly, pallid subjects, with poor digestion, with great flatulence, with much distension, with disordered liver.
Then the kidney, bladder and urethra come in for their share of trouble, which is of a catarrhal nature. Discharges from the bladder, purulent discharges of a thick, tenacious, copious mucus deposited in the urine. In keeping with this there is much burning; burning in the urethra, during and after micturition. "Urine flows slowly with soreness and burning." Kali carb. runs very close to Natr. mur. in many of its old, long-standing bladder troubles.
In old cases of gleet and long-standing cases of urinary troubles that follow gonorrhoea these two medicines are useful, both suitable in the scanty, white, gleety discharge that remains. In both the urination is painful. In Nat. mur. the burning is after urination. Where there is scanty, gleety discharge and the burning is very marked and only after urination, and the patient is extremely nervous and fidgety, Natrum mur. will cure. If the burning is during and after urination and you have the broken- down constitution we have described, then the remedy may be Kali carb. Some of these old cases are entirely painless, having no pain either during or after micturition. Then you get an entirely different class of remedies. The old chronic discharges following a gonorrhoea are as troublesome for the young doctor as anything that will ever fall- into his hands. The remedies -are numerous, the symptoms are scanty, and many times the patient has not been long under the doctor's care, therefore he does not know the patient's constitutional state well and the patient can only tell him of the discharge. "Nothing but the discharge, doctor." You cannot get his mind on his symptoms; he has forgotten that he wakes at 3 o'clock in the morning and cannot get to sleep until 5 o'clock, he has forgotten all the nervous manifestations. With the patient you have had under control, whose constitutional state you get before this condition comes, you ought not to have much difficulty.
One of the evidences that the Kali carb. patient is of a weakly constitution and is on the road to a break-down is that all of his symptoms are aroused and brought into action after coition, after sexual excitement. Now you will take notice in practice and remember it, that coition is a natural thing with man, when it is carried on in order, and when that which is natural is followed by prostration, and this has been so for a long time, there is a break in the constitution, there is something radically wrong. All the symptoms are likely to be worse after coition in Kali carb. He has weak vision, weakness of the senses, tremulousness, and is generally nervous; he is sleepless, and weak, and he shivers and trembles for a day or two after coition. Similar symptoms are observed in the woman. In spite of the fact that the patient is weak, the sexual desire is excessive. It is not orderly. There is a sexual erethism, which is not under the command of the will, and in the male he is subject to copious and frequent pollutions, nightly dreams, sexual prostration. Young men who have abused themselves, or who have indulged excessively in sexual pleasure, go into marriage with weakened genitals, incapacitated; and then there comes a disgust, and it is not strange that there are so many divorces in the world. When the patient is young, some of this trouble can be overcome by living an orderly life and correct homoeopathy.
In Kali carb. there are many complaints affecting the male genital organs; uneasiness and sensitiveness of the testicles. One is in a state of swelling and hardness. Itching and smarting and annoying sensations in the scrotum and sensations that constantly remind the patient that he has genital organs. Constant irritation calling his attention to the genitals, brought on from abuse, from vice, from excesses. Phosphorus is a medicine that is abused in this sphere. Many physicians look upon it as one of the great remedies for the weakness of the genital organs. In Phos. the genital indications are extreme excitement, too active erections, a disorderly strength of the genital organs. Beware of giving it in impotency or in weakness, as this is often associated with very feeble constitutions, and Phos. not only fails to cure, but seems to add to the weakness. - It is -a weakness that you will learn is a vital weakness. Phos. will set patients to running down more rapidly who are suffering from a vital weakness, who are always tired, simply -weak, always prostrated and want to go to bed.
The female has a great friend in Kali carb. It is full of her complaints and has many symptoms likely to be found -in a sick woman. It is useful in cases of uterine hemorrhages that have been incessant in pale, waxy, haemorrhagic women incessant haemorrhage following an abortion. She has been curetted and has had all sorts of treatment, but still that oozing keeps right on. At the menstrual period the flow is very copious and clotted, and then after a prolonged menstruation of ten days or so, during which she has had a copious flow, she settles back into a state of oozing and flowing Until next month and then it rouses up into another ten days of copious menstruation. Kali carb. has cured a number of cases of fibroid tumor long before it was time for the critical period to cure. You must remember that there is natural tendency for a fibroid to cease to grow at the climacteric period, and afterwards to shrivel, and that ' this takes place without any treatment, but the appropriate remedies will cause that haemorrhage to cease, will cause that tumor to cease to grow and after a few days there will be a grand shrinkage in its size.
Kali carb. is often a remedy for vomiting in pregnancy, but to find out when it is the remedy for vomiting of pregnancy we have to go to the whole constitutional state. Vomiting of pregnancy is not cured, although it may be temporarily relieved; by Ipecac.; as this is a medicine that corresponds merely to the nausea itself. In a large number of instances gagging and nausea are only a second or third grade symptom in the remedy that will cure. The condition really depends upon the constitutional state, and the remedy, that is to cure must be a constitutional remedy. Sulphur, Sepia and Kali carb. are among the remedies commonly indicated. Sometimes Arsenic is needed. Of course, if a pregnant woman has simply disordered her stomach and has 'vomited bile a few times the remedy might be Ipecac. 'When a pregnant woman has no constitutional symptoms at all, and upon examining the case you find nothing but the nausea; overwhelming deathly nausea, with continuous vomiting day and night, a single dose of Symphoricarpus rac. will help. That is prescribing upon very limited information, and should only be done in circumscribed or one-sided cases. It is not a long acting remedy it is .not a constitutional remedy and acts very much like Ipecac.
At times you will go into the confinement room when the woman has pains in the back below the waist line. The pains in the uterus are very weak, they are not sufficiently epulsive to make progressive in the labor, the kind of pain that makes the woman utter the cry, "My back, my back!" The pains extend down the buttocks and legs. Pains in the back as if the back would break. Under- good' prescribing these pains are changed into contractions; which prove sufficient to expel the contents of the uterus. When you hear such things you will look back over the history of the case. You will look back for weeks as the roman has "been drawing near the end of gestation and see that the vague things, the chilliness and other features in her constitutional state for which you have been trying to find a remedy now culminate at the time of her confinement into a class of pains. Had you seen that six weeks before and given her Kali carb. you would have prevented the severe labor. It is a severe labor, a prolonged labor; the uterus appears to be weak, and the pains are feeble; they are all-in the back, and do not go to the center of operation as they should. Now, this same kind of a pain may deceive you in taking another form. The pains begin in the back, and appear to go to the uterus and then run up the back, which would turn you aside entirely from the Kali carb. pain into a pain that would indicate Gelsemium. Sometimes these pains are so severe that they actually seem to prevent rather than encourage the contractions of the uterus; when - the contractions of the uterus cease, and the woman screams out and wants her hips rubbed, and screams out with pain in each side of the abdomen rather than in the center, pains in the region where the broad ligaments ought to be, Actaea racemosa will make the pains regular. Puls. is the medicine for absence of marked contraction in cases inclined to do nothing; in a case that is inactive, when the os is sufficiently dilated and the parts relaxed, and the prediction is an easy and simple labor, but the patient does not do anything. It is a state of mildness or inactivity. Puls. will very often cause in five minutes a very strong contraction of the uterus, sometimes almost in a painless way.
"The back aches so badly while she is walking that she feels as if she could lie down on the street," etc., etc. The pain seems to take the force and vigor all out of the patient. After delivery there is a tendency to prolong the flooding, rousing up at every menstrual period, as described.
Weakness of the heart; cardiac dyspnoea; the breath is short and the patient cannot walk or must move very slowly. It is the coming on of a fatty heart: With the suffocation and dyspnoea the breathing is so short that the patient cannot stop to take a drink or eat; the breathing is rapid, not deep, but weak. Dyspnoea with violent, irregular palpitation of the heart, throbbing that shakes the whole frame, pulsation that can be felt to the ends of the fingers and toes. Violent pulsations; patient cannot lie on the left side; accompanied by stitching pain through the chest and cough. In old asthmatic patients with weak pulse, with the same pulsations and palpitation and cannot lie down. The only position it seems that he can find any comfort in is leaning forward, with his elbows resting upon a chair. The attack is violent and continuous, especially worse from 3 to 5 A. M., and worse from lying in bed. He is aroused at 3 o'clock in the morning with these asthmatic attacks. Asthmatic dyspnoea, when the state is that of humid asthma or filling up of the chest with mucus, coarse rattling in the chest, loud, rattling breathing. In patients who always have rattling in the chest, rattling cough, stuffy breathing; with every rainy spell or misty spell, or in cold, foggy weather, the condition becomes that of a humid asthma; asthmatic breathing, with much weakness in the chest, worse from 3 to 5 in the morning. The patient is pale, sickly and anaemic, and complains of stitching pains in the chest.
The cough of this medicine is one of the most violent coughs of all the medicines in the Materia Medica. The whole frame is racked. The cough is incessant, attended with gagging and vomiting, comes on at 3 o'clock in the morning, a dry, hacking, hard, racking cough. "Suffocative cough and choking cough at 5 A. M. Great dryness in the throat between 2 and 3 A. M." Think of Kali carb. when, after troubles like measles, a catarrhal state is left behind, due to lack of reaction, the psoric sequel. The cough following measles is very often a Kali carb. cough. Kali carb., Sulphur, Carbo veg. and Drosera are perhaps more frequently indicated than other medicines in such coughs as follow measles or pneumonia.
The expectoration is copious very offensive, tenacious, lumpy, blood-streaked or like pus, thick yellow or yellowish-green. Very often it has a pungent, cheesy taste; strong taste, as of old cheese. Catarrh of the chest. Dry cough day and night, with vomiting of food and some phlegm, worse after eating and drinking and in the evening.
Nothing is more striking in Kali carb. than the wandering stitching pains through the chest, and the coldness of the chest. The great dyspnoea, the transient stitches, the pleural stitches are important features of this remedy. A great number of the cases in which Kali carb. is suitable are those where the troubles has spread from catarrhal origin and from the lower portion of the lungs upwards. It is not so commonly indicated in those cases where the dullness has begun at the apex of either or both lungs. It will very often ward off future sickness where the family history is tuberculous. Do not be afraid to give the antipsoric remedies when there is a history of tuberculosis in the family, but be careful when the patient is so far advanced with tuberculosis that there are cavities in the lung, or latent tubercles, or encysted caseous tubercles. Your antipsorics might rouse him into a dangerous condition. Do not suppose, however, that it is dangerous to give Sulphur because one's father and mother have died of phthisis. Sulphur might be just the remedy to prevent the child from following the father and mother. Kali carb. is often suitable, and will act as an acute remedy in the advanced stages of phthisis in cases in which it was not indicated primarily as a constitutional remedy. In such instances it will act as a palliative in phthisis, whereas if it were indicated primarily as a constitutional remedy it would do damage in the last weeks. The fortunate thing is that a great many homeopaths are not able to find the homoeopathic remedy. If the patient has yet lung space enough to be cured, Kali carb. will do wonders where the symptoms agree.
I- want to warn you in one respect concerning Kali carb. It is a very dangerous medicine in gout. When you get an old gouty subject who has big toe joints and finger joints, and they are sore and inflamed every now and then, you might think that Kali carb. covers the case very suitably; he is disturbed in just such weather, the is pallid and sickly, his complaints come on at 2 to 3 o'clock in the morning, he has the shooting pains. But these gouty patients are often incurable, and, if so, to undertake to cure them would be a dreadful calamity, because the aggravations would last so long. If you give Kali carb. to one of these incurable patients in very high potency it will make your patient worse, and the aggravation will be serious and prolonged, but the 3oth may be of great service. Kali iod., when it is indicated in the gouty state, acts as a soothing and palliative remedy. But Kali carb. seems to be a dreadful medicine to handle, it is sharp and a two-edged sword. Do not undertake to give medicine with a view to curing these old cases of gout when the nodosities are numerous. Do not give that constitutional medicine that should have been administered to these patients twenty years ago, because there is not reaction enough in the life of the patient to turn him into order, and he will be destroyed. It seems paradoxical to say it, but to cure him is to kill him. The vital action that is necessary to restore him to health would practically tear his framework to pieces. You need not believe these things, you are not obliged to. But think about them, and some day after practicing awhile and making numerous mistakes in attempting to cure incurables you will admit the awful power of homoeopathic medicines. They are simply dreadful. In old gouty des, in old cases of Bright's disease, in advanced cases of phthisis where there are many tubercles, beware of Kali carb. given too high.
While studying the text book, look over the sensations. They are very numerous. Of course, those most striking are the stitching, and tearing pains, shooting, sticking and wandering pains.
KALI IODATUM
This remedy is an antipsoric and antisyphilitic. It has been used very extensively by the old school as an antisyphilitic, but in the very large doses which they used it became to a great extent allopathic to the disease, because of the tremendous effect it produced upon the economy, and implanted its own miasm, and thereby in a measure it suppressed many cases of syphilis. The medicines that are the most powerful substances are really those that sustain a homoeopathic rela tion to the disease in general, and of these the very smallest dose will cure when similar. When the remedy is not similar enough to cure in such a form the increasing of the dose does not make it homoeopathic. There is an idea in vogue that increasing the dose makes the remedy, similar. That is going away from principle. If the remedy is not similar there is no form of dose that can make it similar.
It affects the glandular structures and the periosteum after the manner of syphilis. It produces catarrhal inflammations. It is a deep-acting medicine and closely related to Mercurius. It has ulcerations and catarrhal states and glandular affections like Mercurius. It is similar in its action to Mercurius and is an antidote to it.
The old subjects who have always been taking Calomel or Blue Mass for their bilious complaints will in time become subject to frequent coryzas, constipation, pains and aches, and disturbance of the liver, and disordered stomach, and must have another dose of Mercury. Some of these cases need this remedy. If you practice medicine in a neighborhood where there is a very poor homoeopath you will find that he is giving the Biniodide, or some other preparation of Mercury, for almost all of the colds or sore throats. This establishes upon all of these patients an over-susceptibility, to the weather changes, and they keep taking these red mercurial powders. Some of them carry them around in their pockets. But the more they take of these red powders the more frequently they have sore throats and colds. Many times they will not get over these troubles without Kali iod. in potentized form, or Hepar. Hepar, and Kali.iod. are the two principal medicines that such patients need. Individuals, with this susceptibility to colds and sore throats and weather changes, that is, from the effects of Mercury, who have been led into a Mercurial state, run two ways. Those who are invariably shivering and cold, and want to hover around the fire, and cannot keep warm; will need Hepar, and those that are always too warm, that want the covers off, and wants to be in coin stant motion, extreme restlessness, very tired when keeping still, will have their Mercury antidoted by Kali iod. The Mercurial state will be antidoted, but it sometimes takes several prescriptions and sometimes a series of carefully selected remedies. The psora, that is, his chronic state, will not manifest itself until you have lifted off this miasmatic state, which has been caused by Mercurius. It is astonishing what a great number of men, women and children are bowed down by the miasm that Mercury produces, and yet those prescribers go on giving this form of Mercury and say it is practicing Homoeopathy. I am led to remark that there is yet much to be learned about the art of prescribing.
This remedy has a peculiar mental state. There is a very strong degree of irritability, cruelty, and harshness of temper. He is harsh with his family and with his children; abusive. It will take all the sense of refinement out of his mind and then he will become sad and tearful. Extremely nervous, and must walk and be on the go. If he remains in a warm room he becomes weak and tired, and feels as if he could not stir, does not want to move, and does not know what is the matter with him. He is worse in the warmth of the house, but as soon as he goes into the open air he feels better, and as soon as he begins to walk he feels still better and can walk long distances without fatigue; goes into the house again and becomes weak and tired and exhausted. A nervous and mental exhaustion comes on from resting. The head manifests some peculiar things, such as we sometimes see in syphilis, which the remedy controls when the other symptoms agree. Bi-parietal head pains of nerve syphilis, old, long standing cases. Pains through the parietal bones, through the side of the head, as if crushed in a vise; awful crushing, pulsating; pressing, rending pains on both sides of the head. These are worse in the house, and better from warmth and from motion, better walking in the open air. All through the head there are pains like knife stabs, like nails driven in; lancinating pains, cutting pains in the scalp, in the temples, over the eyes, through the eyes. The pericranium becomes sensitive and filled with nodules. The scalp breaks out with nodular eruptions, tuberculous eruptions, syphilitic eruptions. "Scalp painful on scratching as if ulcerated." "Great disposition for hair to change color and fall out."
Coldness of the painful parts. In watching a syphilitic case, there is often noticed disturbance of vision, and finally iritis. They can be treated homoeopathically. I have seen syphilitic iritis of the most severe character cared with Staphisagria, Hepar, Nitric acid, Mercurius, Kali iod. and many other remedies. The inflammatory process stops at once, there are no adhesions, no deformity, and no troubles remaining behind. If you consider that a case of inflammation must run its course, and will be asso ciated with fibrinous exudations, and adhesions most probably follow, of course you must adopt the plan of dilating with Atrophic, and hold the iris so until the disease has run its course. But the disease does not run its course after a proper remedy, and as that is the, last symptom to appear, it will be the first to go, and you may expect the eye symptoms to disappear within twenty-four hours after the administration of the homoeopathic remedy.
This remedy has marked conjunctival trouble, with green catarrhal discharges from the eyes. This green character applies whenever you can find discharges. There is copious, thick, green expectoration, green discharges of mucous from the nose, from the eyes, from the ear, thick, greenish leucorrhoea, green discharge from ulcers. These thick green or yellowish-green discharges are sometimes very foetid.
At times when you examine the conjunctiva it seems to puff out as though water were behind it, a chemosis. Iodide of potash, produces that state. "Chemosis, purulent secretion." In olden times when I used to give Iodide of potash to rheumatic patients, according to the prevailing craze, I would notice, after a day or two, chemosis coming into the eyes and the patient beginning to ache in his bones all over, while the rheumatism of the joints would disappear. An allopathic effect was taking root upon that patient which would last for years. I have noticed that a large dose of Kali iod. in syphilitics would make the patient get up the next morning with difficulty in opening the lids, and upon opening the eyes the conjunctiva would form water bags, as though water were behind them and they were bagged out. Kali iod. also produces oedema of the lids and injection and tumefaction of the conjunctiva. The mucous membrane becomes red, raw and bleeding. The vessels are enlarged and the surface is very sore, inflamed and smarting. He is compelled to hold the eyelids during winking; the winking is painful and causes scratching, as from sand. Acute conjunctivitis, especially when it occurs in patients who have rheumatism, who have been abused with Mercury, or those afflicted with syphilis. Syphilitic and rheumatic affections of the eye.
Old gouty subjects who must keep in motion, and must keep in the open air, who are always too warm, and cannot endure any degree of warmth in the room, who suffer more from their gouty pains when keeping quiet, those who are fatigued when keeping quiet and can walk and move without fatigue in the open air, especially when it is cold, with - enlarged joints, with restlessness, anxiety, nervousness, harshness of the temper and great irritability, alternating with weeping. This relief from motion will make the routinist give Rhus in many instances, but Rhus would have no relation to the case whatever. Remember, Rhus is a cold patient, who is always shivering and wants to be by the fire, whose complaints are > by the heat, he is > in a warm room and .becomes fatigued from motion, whereas Kali iod. does not become fatigued from continued motion.
The nose comes in for much trouble. In old syphilitic catarrhs they blow out great crusts and pieces of bone; syphilitic ozaena; the bones of the nose are very sensitive to touch and become necrosed, and the nose flattens down and becomes soft. It is deprived of the bony framework that holds it in shape and settles down flat, leaving only the red tip. Extreme pain at the root of the nose like Hepar. Thick, yellowish-green, copious discharge from the nose. Every change of the weather brings on catarrhal states. He is constantly taking cold, sneezing continuously. Copious, watery discharge from the nose, excoriating the passage, and causing burning in the nose. This coryza is < in the open air, but all the rest of the patient is > in the open air. Consequently, when a patient has two such conditions that operate against each other he suffers much, because he cannot find quarters for relief. In a warm room his nasal catarrh, or his coryza, is >, but in the open air he feels > as to the rest of his complaints. "Repeated attacks of violent, acrid coryza from the least cold." With the coryza the frontal sinuses become involved, and there is great pain through the forehead; pain in the eyes, pains through the cheek-bones.
In the throat, as you might suppose from its relations to syphilis and Mercury, there is much trouble. Deep ulcers in the throat, old syphilitic ulcers; perforating ulcers, eating away and destroying all the soft tissues, the uvula and the soft palate. Ulceration upon the tonsils; enlarged tonsils; very painful sore throat. Knots and knobs in the throat upon the mucous membranes. "Dryness of throat and enlarged tonsils." "Terrible pain at the root of the tongue at night." The whole pharynx, larynx, trachea and bronchial tubes suffer from catarrhal conditions. Inflammatory conditions with greenish discharge.
While all the external symptoms and the rest of the body symptoms are relieved in the cold air and by the contact of external cold, internally cold things aggravate. Cold milk, ice cream, ice water, cold drinks and cold food, cold things in the stomach < all the symptoms. Though he has an excessive thirst and will drink large quantities of water, if very cold it will make him sick.
Kali iod. has all the flatulence and belching of. Carbo veg. and Lycopodium. The glands all over the body become- tumid, enlarged and hard. It has cured enlargement of the thyroid gland; it may take this from Iodine.
Very characteristic is the chronic inflammation. of the urethra, following gonorrhoea where the discharge is thick and green, or greenish yellow, without pain. Inflammation of the testicles, syphilitic in character.
Pain and rawness in the larynx, with hoarseness; awakens from constriction of the larynx. It is very useful in phthisis of the, larynx. Cough from constant irritation in the larynx. Dry, hacking cough; hoarse cough with copious greenish expectoration. Catarrhal phthisis with thick, copious, greenish expectoration. Pleuritic effusion. Fluttering of the heart. Palpitation on slight exertion or when walking. Rapid pulse.
Not only in old gouty troubles, but in patients threatening phthisis, and in old malarial troubles this medicine will be of great service. It cures sciatica when the pain is sharp from the hip down, worse lying, sitting or standing and better walking.
You may go to the bedside of a patient who is suffering from what she calls "hives;" you will find she is covered from head to foot with an eruption that forms great nodules; she is fairly burning up from head to foot. She cannot endure any covering; the heat of 'her body is intense, yet she has no rise of temperature. Rough nodular 'manifestations all over the skin; a condition that will go away in a few hours, but in a few days, weeks or months come back again. A single dose of a very high potency of Kali iod. will turn things into order in persons subject to these hives and they will not come again.
KALI PHOSPHORICUM
The symptoms of this remedy are worse morning, evening, and during the night. The over-sensitive, nervous, delicate person, worn out from long suffering, much sorrow and vexation, and prolonged mental work; also such as are broken down from sexual excesses - and vices. It is a long-acting antipsoric. Anaemic; and chlorotic patients. Most complaints are worse during rest, and ameliorated by gentle motion and slowly walking about. The patient in general, and his pains, are aggravated in cold air, from becoming cold, after becoming cold, from entering a cold -place, and in cold, wet weather. He takes cold easily. Aversion to the open air. Draft of air aggravates, and open air aggravates. Numbness in the extremities. Great lassitude. Aggravated by ascending stairs, and by physical exertion. Glands dwindle. Choreic movements. Complaints are worse after coition. The weakness, emaciation, and anaemia and tubercular tendency are strong features of this wonderful antipsoric remedy. Oedema of the limbs and dropsy of serous sacs. Complaints aggravated after eating. Emaciation, wasting diseases with putrid discharges and putrid stools. Fainting spells. Fasting ameliorates. Fatty tendency of muscles and organs. Aggravated after cold drinks, milk. This remedy has been used in gangrenous condition. Parts become, black. Septic, putrid haemorrhages and great prostration. All forms of nervous weakness. Hypochondriasis and hysteria. Inflammation of glands. Complaints from loss of fluids. Orgasm of blood. The pains are aching, pressing, stitching, tearing, tearing downwards, paralyzing. Chronic neuralgia, ameliorated by gentle motion, aggravated from cold. One-sided 'paralysis from a gradually increasing weakness, Paroxysms of pain followed by exhaustion. Pulsation felt all over the body and in the limbs. Symptoms are often one-sided. Many symptoms come during and after sleep. Twitching of- muscles, and jerking of limbs. Ulcers with putrid discharges. Offensive catarrhal discharges. Walking fast aggravates; walking in open air aggravates. Warmth of bed ameliorates. Complaints worse in winter. Too many cures have been made by the followers of Schuessler to -permit this remedy to remain unexplained. Good provings are found in our literature. The high and highest potencies have served the best, and it should be used in the single dose.
Flies into a passion and can hardly articulate. Aversion to answering questions. Apprehensive anxiety, in the evening in bed, and during the night; anxiety after eating, about the future, about his health, about his salvation. Whenever he wakens it oppresses him, and he becomes hypochondriacal. She takes an antipathy to her husband. She is cruel to her baby and husband. Perverted affections. Broods over his condition.. Aversion to company. Complaints come on from bad news. Confusion of mind morning and evening. Contrary humor. Low form of delirium: in typhoid and septic fevers. Delirium 'tremens. Imaginations. Sees dead people. Sees figures, frightful images. Discontented and sad. Dullness of mind in the morning. Discouraged. He refuses to eat. He is very excitable and greatly wrought up from bad news; then follows palpitation and many nervous symptoms. Exhaustion after exertion of mind. He dwells much in fancy. Fear in the evening. Fear of a crowd, of death, of disease, of evil, of people, of solitude. He is easily frightened, which increases his many nervous and mental symptoms. Weak memory. Forgetful. Cannot recall words. Homesickness. Effects of grief and prolonged sorrow." A nervous hurry is noticed in action and speech Nervous excitement bus increased until hysterical conduct is present "It is a great remedy for imbecility. She is impatient and impetuous. Indifference to surroundings, to joy and to her family. Indifference to his business matters, and then comes indolence and lassitude. Insanity; melancholia; thinks she has sinned away her day of grace and refuses to eat. She does not recognize her surroundings. Shrieks and acts like one insane. Quarrels with her family. The irritability is very marked, in morning on waking, in the evening, after coition, during headache, during menses, when spoken to, on waking at any time, after becoming exhausted from a diarrhoea. There is laughing and crying, lamenting and wringing the hands. There is loathing of life; moaning during sleep. Dullness of the senses. Weakness of memory for words, and great prostration of mind. Sadness in morning on waking, in the evening, and also day and night. Obstinate; morose; mood changeable. Mistakes in speaking and writing. In many cases cured a mild mental state was noticed. Oversensitive in general, and especially to noise. Restlessness during menses. The numerous cases of nervous prostration from mental work, prolonged anxiety, much sorrow, and sexual excesses and vice are likely to require this remedy. Incoherent speech. Starting; easily startled from fright, during sleep, from touch and from noise. Stupefaction and suspicious. He is indisposed to talk, or to be talked to. Talking in sleep. Vanishing of thought. Becomes timid and bashful. Vexation brings on many complaints. Weeping and weary of life.
Vertigo afternoon and evening, ameliorated in open air, aggravated after eating, with a tendency to fall forward; aggravated on looking upwards, compelling him to lie down; with nausea and with headache; objects turn in a circle on rising up, when standing, when stooping, on turning the head, when walking in open air.
The head is cold, and sensitive to cold air. Congestion; fullness of the head felt on coughing. Heat in head evening, flushes of heat in the forehead. The head inclines to fall forward. Tension of scalp. Heaviness of the head, morning on rising, in forehead and occiput. This has been a useful remedy in hydrocephalus and many brain affections, when associated with putrid diarrhoea. Itching of the scalp morning on waking, in the night in bed, aggravated 3 to 5 A. M. Movements felt in the head. It has much pain in the head. Pain morning in bed, on rising, on waking, and passes off on moving about. Pain afternoon, evening and night. Worse in very cold air, but ameliorated in open fresh air: She must let the hair hang down. The headache comes with coryza, comes from taking cold. The pain is worse on coughing, and ameliorated by eating; aggravated from becoming overheated, from disordering the stomach, from excitement, and from physical exertion. Weight in occiput with exhaustion. Must lie down and shun the light, lying on back ameliorates; aggravated from jarring and stepping, aggravated before and during menses. .The head aches from mental work, in students, brain-fag from overwork are cured by this remedy when the symptoms agree. Nervous headache during menses. Paroxysmal headaches. The pains in head are ameliorated by gentle motion; aggravated from noise, riding in a carriage, after sleep, sneezing, stepping, stooping, touch, pressure, walking and writing. Headache comes from eye-strain, and is ameliorated by wrapping up the head. Violent pulsating pains. Pain in forehead before menses, above the eyes extending to occiput; across forehead into both temples. Pain in occiput lasting all night ; frequent waking, with pain on rising; wakens with pain in occiput and loins ameliorated lying on back, passes off after rising. Pain in occiput as if hair were pulled; must let hair hang down. Violent headache in sides of head. Neuralgia of left mastoid process, aggravated by motion and in open air. Pain in temples. The pains are aching, boring, burning. Burning in forehead during stool. Bursting in forehead. Drawing in forehead, sides of head and vertex. Jerking pain, pressing pain. Forehead as though bored, ameliorated by eating. Pressing outward in forehead, over eyes as if brain would expand. Pressing in occiput, ameliorated by eating. Pressing in temples and vertex. Soreness in occiput. Stitching in the head, forehead, over eyes, in occiput, sides of head, right frontal eminence and in temples. Stunning pains. Tearing pains in the head, in forehead before menses, ameliorated lying and on appearance of the flow. Tearing in occiput, sides of head, temples, and vertex. Perspiration on mental exertion, of the forehead; cold sweat. Pulsation, forehead and temples. The brain is very sensitive to jar, and to sounds. Shocks felt in the head. Softening of the brain. Complaints come on from uncovering the head.
Anaemia of the optic nerve. Lids agglutinated in the morning and a discharge of mucus, aggravated in the evening. Dryness and dullness of the eyes. Falling of the lids. Inflammation of the conjunctiva, injected blood-vessels and lachrymation. Paralysis of the optic nerve. Photophobia. Redness of the eyes. Staring, restless, excited look. Strabismus following brain diseases. Sunken eyes. Swollen (edematous lids. Twitching of eyes and lids. Weak eyes. Pain in eyes on motion of eyes, on reading, on waking; aggravated in sunlight. Aching. Smarting of eyes, and margins of lids. Drawing, pressing. The balls are sore to touch. Sharp pains from eyes to temples in the morning.Stitching. Sticks. Sensation of sand. Tearing pains. Blurred vision. Colors before the eyes, floating black spots, dark colors; halo around the light. Dim vision after coition. Vision is foggy. Exertion of vision brings on eye troubles and headaches. Vision ,weak.
Discharge from the ear, bloody, offensive, putrid, purulent. Eruptions on the ears. Pimples in the canal. Fullness in ears. The ears are hot. Itching in the ears, aggravated lying. Noises from nervous exhaustion and cerebral anaemia, with vertigo. Buzzing, fluttering, humming, ringing, roaring, rushing, singing, whizzing. Pain deep in ear. Cramping, drawing, pressing. Stitching in left ear down to cheek, and behind the ear. Stinging in ear, aggravated lying. Tearing in -ear. Pulsation in ear. Stopped sensation. Singing in ear. Ears. swollen. Twitching. Hearing acute to noises and voices, but impaired as to the articulation of the human voice. Deafness.
Coryza, fluent or dry, with cough, with headache. Hay-fever with great nervous weakness. Obstinate catarrh. Discharge bloody, excoriating, greenish offensive, purulent, stringy, thick, watery, white, yellow, worse in the morning. Yellow crusts, worse in right nostril. He suffers much from dryness in the nose. Epistaxis in the morning, on blowing the nose, in low fevers. The nose is obstructed. Itching and burning in the nose. Pressing pain at the root of the nose. Much soreness inside of the nose, with yellow' crusts and dark blood. Smell at first acute, later wanting. Sneezing frequent; violent at 2 A. M., from slight exposure. Ulceration in the nose. The nose is swollen.
Brown patch from the edge of the brows to the eyebrows, three inches wide, lasting three months. Chlorotic face. Dark circles under eyes. Cracked lips. Face pale, sickly and dirty. Circumscribed red cheeks. Jaundiced face. Herpes on the lips. Sore crusts on lips. Vesicles on lips. The expression is haggard, sickly and suffering. Flushes of heat in face. Inflammation and swelling of the parotid gland. Itching of the face, in the whiskers, on right cheek, on temples. There are drawing, stitching, tearing pains in the face, aggravated in cold air. Cold applications ameliorate pain in right side of face from a hollow tooth. Pain in jaw bones, ameliorated after eating, speaking, waking and touch. Neuralgia of face followed by great weakness. Neuralgic stitch riding in cold air; ameliorated by heat of hand. Paralysis of one side of face (Caust.). The face perspires. Swollen lips, parotid and submaxillary glands. Tension of the face. Ulceration of lips.
The tongue is dark coated arid bleeding. The gums bleed, and are covered with sores. The typhoid mouth, tongue and teeth in septic fevers when there are putrid odors. Redness of gums and edges of the tongue. The tongue is white, slimy; greenish yellow. Dry mouth and tongue in the morning. Inflamed mouth and gums. Offensive odor, putrid morning, like spoiled cheese. Sore burning mouth and tongue. Receding gums. Thick, salty saliva. Scorbutic, spongy gums. The roof of the mouth swollen in ridges, feels as if lined with grease. Taste bad, bitter, insipid, putrid, sour; bitter in the morning. Grinding teeth in sleep. Nervous chattering of teeth. Pain in teeth from taking cold, aggravated by cold things, aggravated masticating, aggravated after sleep. Pulsating, aching, jerking, pressing, sore, stitching, tearing.
This remedy has been used with some success in diphtheria with putrid odor. Dryness in throat in evening. Fullness and constriction of the throat. Inclination to clear the throat by hawking. Mucus in the throat in the morning, sometimes tasting salty. Lump in throat. Pain in throat on swallowing. Pain in right tonsil. Burning, rawness, soreness. Stitching on swallowing. Stitching pain from left tonsil to ear, while driving in forenoon. Inflammation and swelling of throat and tonsils, with white deposits like membrane.
The appetite is increased and sometimes ravenous, but goes on the sight of food. Hunger soon after eating, from nervous weakness. Hunger during menses. Aversion to food, to bread, to meat. Sensation of coldness in the stomach. Desires cold drinks, sour things, sweets. The stomach is commonly disordered. Fullness and distension. Emptiness with nausea, during menses, after eating. Eructations, after eating, ineffectual, of bile, bitter, empty, of food, sour; waterbrash. Heartburn. Weight in stomach after eating. Loathing of food. Nausea on coughing, after eating, during headache, during menses, during pregnancy; ameliorated by eructations. Retching. Pain in stomach after eating and during menses. Burning, cramping, cutting, soreness. Stitching. Gnawing pain at 5 A. m. on waking. Pressing after eating. Sensation of a stone in the stomach. Extreme thirst for cold water. Thirst during heat. Thirstlessness sometimes. Vomiting in the morning, on coughing, after eating, during headaches, during menses, during pregnancy. Vomiting bile, blood, food, mucus, sour.
The abdomen feels cold, and is sensitive to uncovering. Distension after eating, during menses. Tympanitic with great pain, in typhoid fever. Distended with dropsy. Sensation of emptiness. Fermentation with distress in heart. Flatulence, obstructed, noisy. Sensation of fullness after eating. Heat in abdomen and heaviness. Inflammation of intestines, peritoneum, and liver. Pain in abdomen aggravated at night; across the abdomen left to right; bending double ameliorates; during cough, during diarrhoea, after eating, before and during menses; paroxysmal; before stool. Pain in region of liver. Bearing down, ameliorated sitting, aggravated lying on left side, aggravated after drinking. Seems as though sides of abdomen would burst when sneezing. Burning. Cramping after eating. Cutting. Griping in hypogastrium with ineffectual urging to stool. Soreness in abdomen and liver. Stitching in abdomen and liver. Stitching, catching in spleen, aggravated from motion. Rumbling and tension.
Constipation with very difficult stool; hard, large, knotty. Diarrhoea, morning, 6 A. M., evening, night, during or after eating; colliquative; from fright or excitement, during menses, painless, with vomiting and cramps, with great exhaustion, in typhoid. Dysentery. Offensive flatus which ameliorates the symptoms. Formication of the anus. Haemorrhage from intestines in typhoid. Haemorrhoids, external and internal, itching, painful with burning and swelling. Inflamed piles with offensive moisture. Inactivity of the rectum. Involuntary stools. Pain in rectum during and after stool. Burning during and after stool. Soreness and pressing pains. Stitching pain. Tenesmus after stool. Paralysis of the rectum. Relaxed anus. Ineffectual urging to stool. The stool is excoriating; bloody mucus or pure blood, brown, clay colored, watery stool; putrid flatus followed by tenesmus after breakfast. Stool copious, dark, frequent; large, light colored. Lienteric stools. Stools OFFENSIVE, PUTRID, purulent, watery, like rice water, yellow or yellowish green mucus.
Chronic catarrh of the bladder in old people and nervous wrecks. Pressing and stitching in the bladder. The urging to urinate is frequent, or ineffectual, and worse at night. The urine dribbles. Dribbling after urination; feeble stream, frequent, copious at night. Stream stops and starts. Involuntary at night, in old people, in typhoid, in nervous prostration. In obstinate cases of enuresis, in excitable sensitive children. Unsatisfactory urination. Inflammation and stitching in the kidneys. Burning in the urethra during and after urination. Stitching in the urethra. The urine is albuminous, burning, cloudy, copious, offensive, scanty, watery, yellow like saffron. Sediment is flocculent, mucous, red and sandy. Specific gravity increased. Sugar in the urine.
Erections very troublesome in the morning and during the night without sexual desire; violent in the morning. Impotency. Frequent seminal emissions with erections. Inflammation of glans penis. Sexual passion obliterated.
In tired out nervous women who are subject to abortion. Aversion to coition. Desire increased, intense for four or five days after menses. Inflammation of uterus. Itching from leucorrhoea. It cured a chronic abscess discharging periodically through the vagina and rectum a copious orange-colored fluid. Leucorrhoea acrid, burning, copious, greenish, yellow, offensive, putrid; after menses; in young girls. Menses absent, black, copious, dark, delayed, frequent, irregular, late, offensive, painful, pale, protracted, scanty, short, suppressed, thick. Uterine haemorrhage. Pain in ovaries, in left, ameliorated lying on the back and bending double, during menses. Pain in ovaries on going to sleep. Stitching pain in ovaries. Pain in uterus and ovaries at night during pregnancy. Labor-like pains. Prolapsus of uterus.
Irritation of the larynx and trachea in cold air. Catarrh of the air passages, with thick, yellowish white mucus. Soreness and scraping in the larynx. Tickling in larynx and trachea. Voice hoarse, lost from paralysis of the vocal cords; hoarse froth over-exertion of vocal cords. Respiration difficult at night; rattling, short; difficult on going up stairs. Nervous asthma, aggravated after eating.
Cough in daytime, morning, evening in bed and during the night. Dry cough at night during fever. Hacking cough. Cough from irritation in larynx and trachea. Loose cough. Paroxysmal cough. Racking cough. Rattling cough. Short, spasmodic. Cough in cold air, from deep breathing, during chill and fever, after eating; aggravated lying. Asthmatic cough. Cough from tickling in larynx and trachea. Whistling cough. Whooping cough with great nervous exhaustion.
Expectoration in morning, bloody, frothy, greenish, mucous, offensive, purulent, putrid, salty, thick, sweetish, viscid, yellowish white. This remedy has been favorably mentioned in angina pectoris. Anxiety in the chest in the evening. Catarrh of the chest. Spasmodic constriction. Constriction of the heart. Fatty degeneration of the heart. Haemorrhage from the lungs. Hepatisation of the lungs. Inflammation of the bronchial tubes, lungs, pleura. Oppression of the chest. Itching of the skin. Pain in chest during cough, on inspiration, on motion, on breathing. Pain lower part of chest on coughing, in sides of chest, in heart. Aching in Ieft side of chest through to scapula. Burning in chest. Cutting under right breast. Soreness in chest. Stitching in chest on coughing, during respiration, in mammae, sides of chest, in heart. Tearing pains in chest. Palpitation, anxious, ascending steps, aggravated by motion. Violent. Perspiration like onions in axilla. It is a very useful remedy in catarrhal phthisis. Suffocation of lungs. Swelling in axilla; abscess. Weakness of chest Weak heart. Pulse intermittent and irregular; feeble circulation.
The back feels cold. Eruptions on the back, pimples. Weight in lumbar region. The nape and back lame. Itching. Pain in the back during rest, ameliorated by motion; respiration aggravates, during menses. Pains in occiput and loins morning on waking, ameliorated lying on back, passing off after rising. Pain in back of neck. Pain in dorsal region. Pain in scapulae morning on waking, had to sit up to turn over. Pain first in right, then left scapula. Pain between scapulae. Pain in lumbar region during menses, while sitting, ameliorated by motion. Pain in sacrum during menses. Intense pain along spine. Pain in coccyx. Aching between scapulae. Sore, bruised spine. Burning in back, in lumbar region. Drawing in back, lumbar region. Lameness and stiffness of whole back, ameliorated by gentle motion. Stitching pains in the back, in dorsal and lumbar regions. Stitching toward front of chest with dyspnoea, ameliorated leaning back against chair, aggravated lying on the back, sitting or walking. Tearing pains in the back, in lumbar region. Softening of the spinal cord. Weakness with stumbling when walking. Swollen glands of neck. Weak back. Cannot sit erect without a chair back to lean against. This remedy cures many nondescript spinal affections.
Cold hands and feet. Feet cold and damp. Cramps in thighs, calves and soles. Eruptions on limbs, pimples. The hands are hot. Heaviness of limbs, of lower limbs and feet. It has been of great service in hip joint disease. Itching of the limbs, of palms and soles. Numbness of the limbs, upper and lower; hands and finger tips, feet and legs. Rheumatic and gouty pains in limbs and joints, ameliorated by motion and warmth. Pain in back and limbs, ameliorated by motion. Pain in shoulders and arms, in arms when raising them. Sciatica, ameliorated by gentle motion. Pain in hip and knee. Pain in legs 5 A. m. on waking, ameliorated by gentle motion. Bruised knees and legs. Burning feet, soles and toes. Paralytic drawing in limbs, ameliorated by warmth and gentle motion. Drawing in upper limbs, in the thighs, knees and legs. Drawing laming pain in soles. Pressing pain in shoulder and thighs. Stinging in soles. Stitching in joints, shoulders and knees. Tearing in the limbs; shoulders, upper arm, elbow, forearm, hand, fingers. Tearing in lower limbs; hip, knee, legs, feet. Paralytic tearing in limbs, ameliorated by motion.
Paralysis of limbs. Hemiplegia. The feet perspire. The lower limbs and feet are restless. Rheumatic stiffness after resting. Oedema of hands and feet. The hands tremble. The limbs twitch. Weakness in all the limbs, especially the lower.
Profound sleep. Dreams anxious, amorous, of falling, frightful, of being naked, nightmare, vivid; night terrors in children (Borax). Restless, nervous and hot in sleep. Sleeps on the back. Sleepiness early in evening, after eating. Sleepless after midnight, after mental exertion, after excitement, after vexation. Sleepless with sleepiness. Waking early, as from fright. Walking in sleep. Very troublesome yawning.
Chill, morning, forenoon, noon, afternoon, evening. Chilliness in the open air, in bed. Could scarcely get warm in bed. Chilliness ascending spine in evening. Cold all day. Chilliness after eating. External and internal chill. Nervous shivering and shuddering. Shaking chill. One-sided coldness.
Fever in afternoon and evening. Heat all night, with hunger. Fever alternating with chill. Fever at night in bed. Typhoid fever, low, putrid type. Dry heat. Flushes of heat. It has been a very useful remedy in hectic fevers when there is putrid sweat and putrid expectoration and great nervousness and excitement. Internal heat. Fever with no sweat. Scarlet fever, skin dusky and throat putrid and dark red. Sweat mornings and nights, when eating and drinking, and on slight exertion, during sleep, offensive; pro fuse night sweats.
Dusky spots on calves. Burning after scratching. The skin is cold, jaundiced, dry. Eruption moist, and the moisture is bad smelling. Herpes. Eruptions, itching, pimples, psoriasis, scabby, urticaria; vesicles, bloody, ichorous. It has cured erysipelas that was almost gangrenous with putrid odor. Inactivity of the skin. Itching, crawling, stinging in the skin. Very sensitive skin. Sticking in skin. Ulcers, burning, offensive, even putrid, with yellow discharges.
KALI SULPHURICUM
Two very deep acting remedies unite to form this one. It was left to Schuessler to show its first curative powers. Dewey's work on the "Tissue Remedies" gives the best presentation from the biochemic view. The writer gathered the symptoms from reported cures for many years, and found that they were justified by the study of the two remedies entering into the formation. Many of these symptoms come out upon the sick as aggravations. Some of these are only cured symptoms. This arrangement could be improved upon much by provings. If the reader will carefully use this remedy as herein directed he will be astonished at its depth of action, and if he uses it high he will be surprised at the length of action of every dose. It has cured epilepsy, lupus and epithelioma, and many desquamating skin affections. It has cured most obstinate cases of chronic intermittent fever.
It is useful in catarrhal affections with thick yellow or greenish pus, viscid or thin yellow watery discharges. Most symptoms are aggravated in the evening. The patient craves fresh and even cold air, and he is ameliorated in open air and cool air. Aggravation by exertion and becoming heated. Complaints come on during rest, and are ameliorated by motion. Complaints aggravated in warm room. Takes cold from being overheated. When once heated he cannot cool off without taking cold. Predisposition to phthisis. It is frequently indicated after Tuberculinum. Epileptiform convulsions. Jerking of the limbs and twitching of muscles. Dropsical condition of the extremities. Loss of flesh, and complaints aggravated after eating. Fasting ameliorates many symptoms. Flabby muscles. Fatty degeneration of glands, liver and heart. Heaviness of limbs and weariness of the body. Hysterical symptoms. Sluggishness of the body and lack of physical irritability. Well selected remedies fall short in action. Wants to lie down, but lying in bed aggravates; he must walk about to ameliorate his sufferings. Surging of blood in the body. Pain in the limbs, bones and glands. Wandering pains. Pains ameliorated by motion, ameliorated walking, ameliorated in open air; aggravated in a warm room, aggravated sitting or lying, or rest in any form. The pains are burning, cutting, jerking, STITCHING and TEARING. ULCERATIVE PAINS. Tearing downward in the limbs. Tearing in glands and muscles. PULSATION ALL OVER THE BODY. Touch aggravates many symptoms. Many symptoms appear on waking. Trembling and quivering. Walking ameliorates. Warm coverings aggravate, warm room aggravates, warm bed aggravates, warm wraps aggravate; bathing aggravates. Complaints dating back to suppressed eruptions. Post scarlatinal nephritis. One does not need to reflect to perceive this is a Pulsatilla somewhat intensified. It takes up the work and finishes as a complement of Pulsatilla, unless, as in some instances, the patient becomes a cold and chilly subject and is better during rest, and then Silicea often will be found to have what symptoms remain. It is usual for a patient under a deep acting remedy to go to opposite modalities, and hence Puls. is so often followed by Silicea; but this is not always true. When Puls. has acted well for a time and because of opposite modalities Silicea does good work for a while, and then the patient swings back to the original state, symptoms and modalities, then it is that Kali sulph. is of great usefulness. What occurs is the same as when Sulph., Calc. and Lyc. have rotated in a given case too deep to be cured by a single remedy and a series of remedies has been what was required because the symptoms changed in such a manner that such a series was homoeopathically suited.
Quite unlike Pulsatilla, this patient is easily angered and obstinate and VERY IRRITABLE. Seems to be thinking of something far away. ANXIETY in evening in bed, during the night and on waking. Aversion to work, to business and to company (like Puts.). Concentration of mind difficult, and want of self-confidence. Confusion in the evening and in the morning, in a warm room, ameliorated in open air. Dullness of mind, discouraged and discontented with everything. Extremely excitable, and mental exertion aggravates. Fear at night of death, of falling, and of people. Frightened at trifles, and forgets what he was going to do and to say. He is always in a hurry, as if excited. Impatient and impetuous. Hysterical and excited in the evening, and mind active. Cannot make up his mind to do and act. Very irritable in the morning on waking, in the evening and during menses. Misplaces words in writing. Alternating moods. Changeable disposition. Restlessness during menses. Low spirited morning and evening. Oversensitive to noise. Mental symptoms from sexual excesses. Walking in sleep. Shrieking. Easily startled, from fright. on falling asleep, and during sleep. Indisposed to talk. He talks in sleep. General timidity. Weeping.
The vertigo is a prominent feature in the evening, in a warm room, aggravated after eating, aggravated during headache, aggravated looking upwards; with nausea; must lie down; objects turn in a circle; aggravated sitting, aggravated rising up, and standing; ameliorated in open air. Feels he is falling forward. He staggers.
Boiling sensation in the head, and coldness of vertex. Hyperaemia in bed, on coughing, and in a warm room. Constriction like a band or close fitting cap. Constriction of forehead. Much dandruff. Eruptions on scalp, crusts, eczema, moist, sticky, pimples, scaling. Fullness in head, and hair falls out. Heat in head in a warm room. Heat in forehead. Flushes of heat. Heaviness of head, morning, in forehead, in occiput. Itching of the scalp in the morning. The brain feels loose. Sensation of movements in head on moving the head. There are numerous headaches. Pain morning on waking, EVENING and night, aggravated from a draft, during chill, taking cold, during coryza, on coughing, after eating, when heated, from warm room, Jarring, during menses, motion of the head, pressure. It is ameliorated in open air, in cold air, lying. Rheumatic headache in evening, aggravated in warm room, aggravated moving head from side to side or backwards. Catarrhal headaches. Gastric headaches. The aggravation of headaches by motion is an exception, and it will be interesting to learn what further provings and observations bring forth. The Pains are pulsating, aggravated shaking head, after sleep, sneezing, standing, stepping heavily, stooping, straining the eyes; aggravated in a warm room. The pains are violent. Walking in open air ameliorates. Pain extends to eyes and forehead. Pain in forehead, morning, evening; aggravated after eating. Pain over eyes. Pain in occiput, sides of head, temples. The pains are boring, burning, bursting, drawing, jerking, pressing, STITCHING in head and SIDES of head. Stunning. Tearing. Pulsating in occiput, sides of head, temples, vertex. Shocks in head, in sides of head, mostly in right side.
The eye symptoms are numerous. Lids agglutinated. Dryness. Discharge, yellowish, greenish. Inflammation of conjunctiva, of lids. Dark veins. Eruptions about the eyes and on the lids. Lachrymation and itching. Opacity of the cornea. It is recommended for cataract. Pain, burning, pressing and tearing. Photophobia, redness of eyes and edges of lids. Spots on the cornea; ulceration of the cornea. Swollen lids. Dark colors, variegated colors, yellow. Halo around the light. Black floating specks. Dazzling. Dim vision. Exertion of vision brings on many complaints. Foggy vision. Sparks before the eyes. Weak vision.
Catarrh of Eustachian tubes and middle ear. Dryness of the middle ear. Discharge from ear, yellow, thin, bright yellow or greenish, bloody, offensive, PURULENT. Eruptions, eczema, excoriated, pimples. Eruptions behind ears. Itching in cars. Noises; buzzing, chirping, cracking, crackling, humming, RINGING, roaring, rushing, whizzing. Flapping sensation in the ear. Pain in ear, evening, aching, boring, cutting, pressing, stitching, tearing. It has cured polypus. The ears feel stopped, and pulsate. The hearing is impaired.
Fluent coryza. Catarrh with discharge, bloody, burning, excoriating, greenish, offensive, purulent, thin, YELLOW, slimy, or thick and viscid. Dryness in the nose. Bleeding (in morning on blowing. Itching in nose. Obstruction. Pain, burning. Soreness in nose, of septum. Smell acute, later lost. Sneezing. Swollen nose.
Sickly, yellow, chlorotic face. Cracked lips. Sometimes pale. Sometimes circumscribed redness. Drawn face. Suffering, sickly expression. Eruptions on face, lips and nose. Herpes, pimples and scales. Desquamating face. Flushes of heat. Itching. Inflammation of the submaxillary gland with swelling. Prosopalgia, aggravated when the room becomes too warm, and in the evening; ameliorated in the open air. The pains are drawing, stitching and tearing. Perspiration of the face. Swollen glands of jaw, swollen lips. Twitching face. It has cured a wart on the lip, and will cure epithelioma when the symptoms agree.
Aphthae in mouth. Dryness of mouth and bleeding gums. Mucus in mouth and on the tongue. Sore burning tongue. Salivation. Taste insipid, putrid, sour, sweetish, wanting. Coated yellow slimy tongue, mostly at the base. Toothache aggravated in a warm room, ameliorated in cool fresh air. Dryness and constriction of throat. Frequent hawking of mucus. Heat and inflammation of throat. Sensation of a lump in the throat. Mucus in the throat in the morning. Painful sore throat. Pain on swallowing. Rawness, burning and sticking. The tonsils much swollen. Swallowing difficult.
Great anxiety and distress in the stomach. Appetite is increased, ravenous, or wanting. Aversion to bread, to eggs, to food, to meat, to hot drinks and warm food. Coldness in stomach. Catarrh of stomach. Desires sour thing, SWEETS, cold drinks and cold food. Distension of stomach. Irritable, easily disordered stomach. Sensation of emptiness and faintness in stomach. Eructations, after eating, bitter, empty, of food, SOUR, waterbrash. Eructations ameliorate. Gastroduodenal catarrh with jaundice. Fullness after eating ever so little (Lyc.). Heartburn, heaviness and flushes of heat. Hiccoughing. Loathing of food. Nausea during chill, during cough, after cold drinks, after eating, with headache, on motion. Pain in stomach after eating and drinking. Burning, cramping, cutting, pinching, pressing, soreness, stitching. Pulsating in stomach. Retching when coughing. Burning thirst. Vomiting on coughing, after eating, during headache, during menses. Vomiting bile, food, mucus, sour.
Coldness in the abdomen. Distension after eating. Dropsy. Enlarged liver. Obstructed flatulence. Sensation of fullness after eating. Sensation of emptiness in lower abdomen after stool ameliorated by displacing flatus. Heat and heaviness. Complaints of the liver. Itching of the skin. Pain in abdomen at night. Cramping during diarrhoea, after eating, before the menses, during menses, aggravated by motion. Pain in inguinal region and in the liver. Burning, cutting, pressing. Pressing in hypogastrium and liver. Soreness in abdomen and in the liver. Stitching in the abdomen, in the sides of the abdomen, in the inguinal region, in the liver. Pulsating. Rumbling before stool. Trembling in abdomen. Tympanitis.
Constipation that is very obstinate, alternating with diarrhoea. Stool difficult, soft or hard, insufficient, during menses, from inactivity of the rectum. Diarrhea in the morning, evening, night, after midnight, painless, or with cramps, during menses. Chronic diarrhea. Offensive, putrid flatus which ameliorates many abdominal symptoms. Haemorrhage from the anus. Hemorrhoids, external, internal, large and bleeding. Involuntary stool. Violent itching of the anus. Pain in the rectum and anus, during stool, after stool; BURNING during diarrhoea, during stool, after stool. Cutting, pressing, smarting and great SORENESS. Parts excoriated. STITCHING in anus. Tenesmus after stool. Urging to stool, ineffectual, absent in constipation.
Stool is excoriating, black, thin and offensive. Stool bloody, frequent, offensive, purulent, watery, yellow slime. When constipated the stool is dry, hard, knotty, LARGE, like sheep dung, small. The stool is light colored and bileless. Chronic catarrh of bladder. The pain is pressing, sticking. It has urging to urinate aggravated at night, constant or frequent, ineffectual. Urination is painful, frequent at night, dribbling when walking. Inflammation of the kidneys with stitching pains.
Gonorrhoea in the advanced stage, with green or yellow thin or viscid discharge. Haemorrhage from the urethra. Burning during urination, and in the meatus. Cutting. The urine is albuminous, and this remedy has been especially useful in albuminuria following scarlet fever. The urine burns and is cloudy, high colored, copious, or scanty, offensive, with red and purulent sediment. Copious viscid mucus in the urine.
Impotency. Induration of testes. Inflammation of glans penis. Orchitis after suppressed gonorrhoea (Puls.). Itching of genitalia and scrotum. Drawing in testes. Sexual desire diminished or entirely -lost. Swollen testes. It builds up women who have been subject to abortion. Aversion to coition. Excoriation of the genitalia, with itching. Leucorrhoea, burning, excoriating, greenish, yellow, purulent, thick or watery. Menses absent; bright red, copious, too soon, or too late, offensive, painful, protracted, scanty, suppressed. Haemorrhage from the uterus. Pain in uterus, during menses. Bearing down in the pelvis. Burning in the genitalia. Labor-like pains during menses. Prolapsus of the uterus.
Catarrh of the air passages with thick greenish, yellow or white mucus. Dryness in the larynx. Rawness in the larynx. Soreness and roughness. Almost constant scraping in the larynx, aggravated after eating, at night in bed, until midnight; almost driven to distraction by the necessity to clear the larynx and gets up only white thick mucus. Tickling in the larynx. Hoarseness. Recurrent coryza with irritation in larynx. Voice lost. Every cold settles in the larynx. Asthma aggravated in a warm room, ameliorated in open air.
Dyspnoea evening, night, with cough, when lying, walking, ameliorated in open air. RATTLING BREATHING. Short, suffocative breathing in a warm room. Wheezing in a warm room. Whistling. Coughing in morning, evening, in bed, NIGHT; ameliorated in cold air, ameliorated in open air, ameliorated by cold drinks. Cough with coryza, aggravated lying. Dry, hoarse, croupy cough at night. Cough aggravated after eating, during fever. Exhausting cough. Hacking cough. Loose cough. Paroxysmal, racking cough. RATTLING cough. Suffocating cough. ' Tickling in larynx, trachea and deep in chest. Warm room aggravates cough. Whooping cough with yellow slime or yellow watery expectoration. Expectoration bloody, difficult, must be swallowed, or slips back, purulent, yellow or greenish, slimy, watery, viscid.
Anxiety in the chest. It is one of the most surprising remedies in catarrh of the chest. Rattling in chest from every cold change in the weather. Constriction of the chest. The last part of pneumonia and pleurisy will bring out symptoms for this remedy. Itching of the skin of the chest. Eruptions, eczema, pustules. Oppression of chest and haemorrhage. After bronchitis in children, when every cold causes rattling in chest and there is no expectoration. Burning, cutting, stitching and soreness in chest. Pain in heart. Stitching in the heart. Palpitation with anxiety of heart. Tumultuous palpitation. Perspiration in axillae. Weak chest. This remedy has saved many people from phthisis. It has cured swollen sensitive mammae coming every month before menses.
Coldness in the back. Pain in the back on breathing, during menses, periodical, aggravated sitting, aggravated standing; ameliorated walking; aggravated in a warm room. Wandering pains. Pain in cervical region, dorsal region, between the shoulders. Pain in lumbar region during menses, while sitting, and walking. Pain in sacrum. Aching, bruised, burning, drawing, STITCHING. Tension in the cervical region. Weakness in the lumbar region.
Arthritic nodosities. Coldness of upper limbs and hands. COLD FEET evening in bed, and during fever. Cracked hands. Cracking in joints. Pimples and vesicles on limbs. Desquamation on legs above the shoe tops in a young woman. Heat of hands. Hip joint disease. Heaviness of lower limbs. Itching of the skin. Jerking of the limbs. Numbness of hands, lower limbs and feet. Pain in the limbs during chill. Rheumatic pains in limbs. Cramps in muscles. Drawing in knees and legs. Rheumatic pains aggravated in a warm room; ameliorated walking in open air; aggravated sitting; ameliorated moving about. Sore bruised pain in tibia. STITCHING in the joints, in lower limbs, knees, legs ; WANDERING STITCHING. Tearing pains during chill, in joints, upper limbs, lower limbs, thighs, legs. Wandering- tearing pains, ameliorated by motion, and walking in open air. Perspiration of palms, of feet. Cold sweat of feet. Restless legs. Stiffness of joints. Swelling of knees, legs, feet. Trembling of limbs, hands and feet. Twitching thighs. Ulcers on legs. Weakness of joints, upper limbs, of knees.
The sleep is full of dreams. He has nightmare. Dreams anxious, of death, of being in an accident and nearly killed, of robbers, of sickness, frightful, of ghosts. Late falling asleep. Restless sleep. Sleepiness in afternoon and evening, and after eating. Sleepless before midnight. Waking early, and frequently.
Chill EVENING and night. Chilliness in the evening. Chilliness after exertion. Coldness of the skin. Quotidian chill. Shaking chill EVENING, 5 P. M., 6 P. M. Fever without chill, evening until midnight. Fever, dry heat, flushes. Hectic fever. Intermittent. Perspiration in morning, NIGHT, after midnight. Perspiration on slight exertion; copious.
Sensation of burning in the skin; burning after scratching. The skin is often cold. DESQUAMATION. Discoloration; liver spots; red spots. Dry skin; inactivity of skin. Dry, burning skin. Epithelioma. Eruptions, blisters, burning, dry, moist; eczema with yellowish green, watery, discharge, herpetic. Itching and stinging eruptions. Rash like measles. Eruptions painful, pimples, psoriasis, pustules, red eruptions. Scabby eruptions. Scabby after scratching. Scaly eruptions on a moist base. Smarting, suppurating eruptions. Tubercular eruptions. Urticaria, nodular. Vesicular eruptions. Erysipelas with blisters. Easy excoriation of the skin. Intertrigo. Formication. Itching, burning, crawling, stinging; aggravated when warm in bed; ameliorated scratching. Moisture of the skin after scratching. Neuritis. The skin is very sensitive: a sore feeling in the skin. Sticking after scratching. Skin swollen and dropsical.. Sensation of tension. Ulcerative pain. Ulcers, bleeding, burning, bloody discharge, stabbing, yellow discharge, indolent, pulsating, suppurating, tuberculous. Painful warts.
LACHESIS
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Lachesis is a frequently indicated remedy, and one that you will need to study much in order to know how to use. Lachesis seems to fit the whole human race, for the race is pretty well filled up with snake as to disposition and character and this venom only causes to appear that which is in man.
We will first give a survey of the general symptoms, those which characterize the remedy and are of greatest importance, and the circumstances under which the symptoms appear, are brought out, or are aggravated.
One who is a constitutional Lachesis patient will find himself suffering from an aggravation of his symptoms in the Spring, when he goes out from the cold weather into the milder weather, and especially is that so if it is mild and rainy, or cloudy weather. Or if he goes from a cold into a warmer climate the symptoms of Lachesis will come out. The warm south winds excite the Lachesis symptoms.
The symptoms of Lachesis are worse on entering sleep. He may have felt nothing of his symptoms when awake, but when sleep comes on they are aroused, and they gradually increase as the sleep is prolonged, so that a very long sleep will aggravate all the state and condition of a Lachesis patient, and when awakening from sleep he looks back upon that sleep with sorrow. The sleep has been disturbed by attacks of suffocation and by awful dreams, and now, after having slept a long time, he arouses with dreadful headaches, with palpitation, with melancholy, with sorrows from head to foot. His body is full of suffering and his mind sees no brightness in anything. There is a cloudy state, sadness, melancholy, insane notions, whims, jealousy and suspicion. When taking a warm bath, or applying warm water to places that are inflamed, his mental symptoms are aggravated. After a warm bath or after getting warmed up, or, if he becomes chilled from being out on a cold day and then goes into a warm room the symptoms come on. After going into a warm bath, palpitation comes on; it seems as if his head would burst, his feet become cold, and he is shocked all over, pulsation all over, or feeble heart. Fainting in a warm bath. Girls sometimes faint when going into a warm bath. The patient may be cold and chilly yet the warm room increases or brings out the symptoms.
The general aspect of the patient and the localities will point sometimes to Lachesis. Upon the face there is an appearance of anxiety, of unrest and distress. The face is spotted or purple and the eyes are engorged. The eyes look suspicious. If there is an inflamed spot, it is purple. If there is an inflamed gland, and Lachesis is full of inflammation of the glands and cellular tissues, there is a purple or mottled appearance. If there is an ulceration the ulceration bleeds black blood, which soon coagulates and looks like charred straw. From the wounds there is much bleeding. Small wounds bleed much like Phosphorus and Kreosote. A prick of a pin will ooze great drops of blood. Ulcers eat in, have false granulations, are putrid, bleed easily, and the blood is black, and all round the ulceration there is a purple, mottled appearance, looking as if about to become gangrenous. Often gangrene does come; gangrene of parts that have been injured. Sloughing with great offensiveness. The parts turn black and slough. The veins become varicose. These are found upon the limbs, having the appearance of the varicose veins that come after gestation. Enlargement of the veins is a prominent condition of Lachesis.
From the slightest exertion of the mind or from the slightest emotion the extremities become cold, the heart becomes very feeble, the skin is covered with sweat and the head is hot. Warmth does not seem to relieve the coldness of the feet and hands; they are so cold. They may be wrapped up in flannels and still they remain cold, but the patient has an aversion to heat; aversion to a warm room, because suffocation is brought on. He cannot breathe and wants the windows open. It is weakness of the heart; sometimes so weak that it can hardly be heard or felt, and the pulse is feeble and intermittent. At other times there is audible palpitation of the heart.
As we go over the symptoms of the text we will notice something singular about the complaints, that is, their tendency to affect the left side, or to begin on the left and extend to the right. The paralysis begins by gradually appearing weakness upon the left side. Which extends to the right side. It has a strong affinity for the ovaries, and in-this it will be found that the left ovary is affected first. So, in inflammation of the ovaries, the left will be affected first, and later the right. The inflammation begins on the left side of the throat and gradually goes to the right. The left side of the head is commonly most affected. The left eye becomes painful and the pain extends to the right. The left side of the back of the head, in the occipital headache, will be more affected than the right. This does not always follow, and if the reverse is true it does not contra-indicate Lach., but such is the common feature of it. Left upper and right lower, has been observed.
In many symptoms of Lachesis, there is morning aggravation. This is the well-known Lachesis aggravation after sleep; the patient will sleep into the aggravation. In the milder symptoms this aggravation is mild and is not felt until after the patient wakes up from a long sleep, but if the aggravation is one that is of considerable violence, the patient may feel it immediately on going to sleep, and it arouses him; for instance, the heart symptoms. As soon as he goes into a sleep he rouses up with palpitation, with dyspnoea, with suffocation, with exhaustion, with vertigo, with pain in the back of the head, and many other circulatory disturbances.
The next most important thing to be studied is the mental state. Nothing stands out more boldly than the self-consciousness, the self-conceit, the envy, the hatred, the revenge and the cruelty of the man. These things, of course, are matters of self-consciousness, an improper love of self. Confusion of the mind to insanity. All sorts of impulsive insanity. The mind is tired. The patient puts on an appearance like the maudling of a drunkard, talks with thick lips and thick tongue, blunders and stumbles, only partly finishing words; the face is purple and the head is hot. There is choking and the collar is uneasy about the neck; and the more uneasiness about the neck, the more choking, the more confusion of mind and the more appearance of intoxication. You will see if you talk with one who is intoxicated with whiskey symptoms like Lachesis, he stumbles through, hardly realizing what he says, half finishing his sentences and his words, leaving his "g's" off all the present participles; he stumbles and blunders, he mutters, and tells you first one thing and then another. These symptoms are increased under the circumstances mentioned, in the Spring; in the warm weather following a cold spell; in rainy weather; after a warm bath; after sleep. The mental state is large. Jealousy without any reason. Unwarranted jealousy and suspicion. Many times this medicine has cured suspicion in girls, when they were simply suspicious of their girlfriends. She never sees a whispered conversation going on but they are talking about her, to her detriment. Suspects that they are contriving to injure her, and she will resort to any scheme to see if they were not talking of her to her detriment. A woman imagines that her friends, husband, and children are trying to damage her; that her friends are going to put her in an insane asylum. Apprehension of the future. Thinks she is going to have heart disease, and is going insane, and that people are contriving to put her in an insane asylum. Imagines her relatives are trying to poison her and she refuses to eat. She thinks sometimes that it is only a dream and she can hardly say whether she dreamed it or whether she thinks it. She thinks she is dead, or dreams that she is dead, and in the dream preparations are being made to lay her out, or that she is about to die.
Thinks she is somebody else, and in the hands of a stronger power. She thinks she is under superhuman control. She is compelled to do things by spirits. She hears a command, partly in her dream, that she must carry out. Sometimes it takes the form of voices in which she is commanded to steal, to murder, or to confess things she never did, and she has no peace of mind until she makes a confession of something she has never done. The torture is something violent until she confesses that which she has not done. Imagines she is pursued. Imagines that she has stolen something, or that somebody thinks she has stolen something, and fears the law. She hears voices and warnings, and in the night she dreams about it. The state of torture is something dreadful, and it then goes into a delirium with muttering. The delirium is carried on like one muttering when drunk. This state increases until unconsciousness comes on and the patient enters into a coma from which he cannot be aroused. The patient also goes through periods of violence and violent delirium.
It is full of religious insanity. You will find a dear, sweet old lady, who has always lived what would be called an upright and pious life, yet she is not able to apply the promises that are in the Word of God to herself; these things seem to apply to somebody else, but not to her. She is full of wickedness and has committed the unpardonable sin. She is compelled to say these things; she is overwhelmed by these things and she is going to die and going to that awful hell that she reads about. The physician must listen to this with attention. The physician might make the mistake in this instance of making light of such feelings. If he does, the patient will not return, and he will be deprived of the chance of benefitting her. No matter what her whims are, no matter what her religious opinions are, her state of mind must be treated with respect. It must be treated as if it were so.
She must have sympathy and kindness. It is an unfortunate thing for a doctor to get a reputation of being an ungodly man, among pious people, as he will be deprived of doing these people an immense amount of good. He must be candid with all the whims and notions of the people that he visits in the world. He must be everybody's friend, and he can be such without any hypocrisy if he is simply an upright and just man.
The state of religious melancholy, with religious insanity, is not uncommonly attended with much loquacity, with talkativeness, which Lachesis is full of. It is commonly among women, very seldom among men, that we find this religious melancholy. Now, this woman is impelled to tell it; she will annoy her intimate friends, day and night, with this story of the damnation of her soul and her wickedness and all the awful things she has done. If you ask her what things she has committed she will say everything, but you cannot pin her down to the fact that she has killed anybody. If you allow her to go through with her story she will tell you all the crimes in the calendar that she has committed, although she has been a well-behaved and well-disposed woman. There is another kind of loquacity belonging to Lachesis. The patient is impelled to talk continuously. It is found in another state in which the patient is compelled to hurry in everything she does, and wants everybody else to hurry. With that state of hurry is brought out the loquacity, and this is something far beyond comprehension until you have once heard it. There is no use attempting to describe it, it is so rapid, changing from one subject to another. Sentences are sometimes only half finished; she takes it for granted that you understand the balance and she will hurry on. Day and night she is wide awake, and with such sensitiveness to her surroundings that you would naturally think, from what things she hears and how she is disturbed by noise, that she can hear the flies walk upon the walls and the clock striking upon the distant steeple. You do not get all these things in the text, you have to see them applied. But the things I give you that are brought out clinically are those things that have come from applying the symptoms of the remedy at the bedside to sick folks. "Most extraordinary loquacity, making speeches in very select phrases, but jumping off to most heterogeneous subjects." "One word often leads into the midst of another story." These states may come on in acute diseases like typhoid, when it _will take the usual typhoid delirium, or they may come on in conditions like diphtheria, or in any of the diseases that are characterized by blood poisoning; they may come on in the puerperal state, or may take the form of insanity. It is a long acting remedy, and if it has been abused its effects will last a life time.
In many cases a close connection between the mental symptoms and the heart symptoms will be noticed, especially in young women and girls who have met with disappointment, who have been lying awake nights because of disturbance of the affections, or from disappointment, or from shattered hopes, or from grief. Prolonged melancholy, mental depression, hysterical symptoms, weeping, mental prostration and despair, with pain in the heart, with a gone sensation or sensation of weakness in the heart, with difficult breathing. She meditates upon suicide, and finally settles back into an apathetic state, in which there is an aversion to everything, to work, and even to thinking.
I might impress upon your mind the head symptoms if I related the case of a patient who described her symptoms probably more typically than you can find in the books. She was sitting up in bed and unable to lie down; she was worse from lying down, her face was purple, her eyes were engorged, the face puffed and tumid and the eyelids bloated. She sat there perfectly quiet in bed and described the pain as a surging sensation, which came up the back of the neck and head and then over the head. That is a typical feature of Lachesis. A surging in waves. Waves of pain that are not always synchronous with the pulse. They may not relate to the flow of blood at all. The surging is aggravated by motion, not so much in the act of motion, but after moving. It is sometimes felt after walking or changing to another place, and sitting down again; that is, a few seconds after the motion is completed the pain begins, and it comes to its height instantly and then gradually subsides into a very steady surging or a more steady ache. In the head there is a continuous steady ache, which may be aggravated or aroused into a surging which is so violent that it seems as if it would take the life of the patient.
The headache begins in the morning on waking. The milder Lachesis headaches begin in the morning on awaking and wear off after moving about a while. With the headaches and complaints in general there is a momentary vanishing of thought; all sorts of vertigo. Vertigo with nausea and vomiting. The vertigo inclines the patient to turn to the left.
Lachesis has bursting pains in the head; congestive pains with a feeling as if all the blood in the body must be in the head, because the extremities are so cold and the head pulsates and hammers. This pulsating headache is part of a general pulsation from head to foot. In all arteries and inflamed parts, there is pulsation. The inflamed ovary pulsates, and it feels at times as if a little hammer were hammering upon the inflamed part with every pulsation of the artery. Lachesis has a number of times cured fistula in ano when associated with this feeling as if a hammer continually hammered the little fistulous pipe. It has cured fissure of long standing when it felt as if the inflamed part were being hammered. Haemorrhoids have been cured when this sensation of hammering was present. So that we see this pulsation in the head is not a special symptom, but is a general symptom, brought out in relation to the head.
Some symptoms are valuable because of the frequency of their association, and when such is the case their concomitant relation becomes important. The cardiac symptoms are frequently connected with the headache symptoms in Lachesis. It is seldom that you will see Lachesis headaches without cardiac difficulty. A weak pulse, or the pulsation felt all over the body, is more or less associated with violent Lachesis headaches.
In the text we find weight and pressure as a strong feature of the Lachesis head symptoms. With almost any complaint of the body, with typhoids, at the menstrual period, during the congestive chill, it seems that the body becomes cold, the extremities become cold, the knees are cold, the feet are cold, and it is impossible to keep them warm, while the face is purple and mottled, the eyes are protruding and engorged, and this awful pain in the head, with a tendency to become unconscious, incoherent speech, difficulty of articulation, and finally actual unconsciousness.
In relation to the head symptoms and mind symptoms and the sensorium in general, the oversensitiveness that is found in Lachesis ought to be mentioned. His symptoms become very intense. The vision becomes very intense; the hearing becomes intense; the sense of touch especially is overwrought. The touch of the clothing becomes very painful, while hard pressure may be agreeable. The scalp becomes so sensitive to the touch of the hand that it is painful, while the pressure from a bandage is agreeable. Oversensitive to noise, oversensitive to motion in the room, to conversation and to others walking over the floor. By these circumstances the pains are increased. The patient becomes extremely sensitive throughout all the senses of the body. The oversensitiveness to touch is probably extensively in the skin, because of the fact that hard pressure often gives relief. In one who is suffering from peritonitis, from inflammation of the ovaries or uterus, or any of the abdominal viscera, the skin is so sensitive to the clothing that contrivances are sometimes necessary to relieve the suffering from the touch of the bed clothing. Something in the form of a hoop will be found in the bed, or the patient will have the knees drawn up, or with the hands will hold the clothing from touching the body. The ordinary weight of the hand may bring out the soreness that is in the abdomen, which is an entirely different soreness, whereas the clothing touching the abdomen only brings out the oversensitiveness of the skin. The mere touch of the skin with the finger or hand is unbearable.
There are many inflammatory and congestive conditions of the eyes. The eye symptoms are worse after sleep, and the eyes are oversensitive to touch and light. With the eye symptoms we have headaches, because the brain and eyes are so closely associated. In the sore throats, when the spatula or tongue depressor happens to touch the wall of the throat, the tonsil, or the root of the tongue, there is a feeling as if the eyes would be pressed out. Violent pain in the eyes from touching the throat. Lachesis is a great jaundice medicine, because it produces much disturbance in the liver. Yellowness of the skin and whites of the eyes, and thickening of tissues about the eyes. "Fistula lachrymalis," which is accompanied by long standing eruptions about the face.
Oversensitiveness of the meatus auditorus externus. Anything introduced into the canal of the ear will cause violent, spasmodic coughing and tickling in the throat. So sensitive is the mucous membrane of the ear that a violent cough, like whooping cough, will come on from touching the mucous membrane of the ear. This only shows the oversensitiveness of reflexes, and the oversensitiveness in general. With the hearing there is the same oversensitiveness that we have spoken of elsewhere. The Eustachian tube becomes closed with a catarrhal thickening, stricture of the Eustachian tube.
The catarrhal symptoms of the nose are prominent. Frequent bleeding of the nose and body, watery discharge from the nose. Always taking cold in the nose. Stuffing up of the nose, with disturbance of smell. Oversensitiveness to smell, and oversensitiveness to odors, finally loss of smell. Lachesis has inflammatory conditions, very chronic in character, with crusty formations in the nose, sneezing, watery discharges from the nose and catarrhal headaches. Sometimes the headache goes off when the catarrhal discharge comes, and when the catarrhal discharge stops the headache comes on. Violent headache with discharge, with sneezing and coryza. Congestive headaches with coryza. This catarrhal condition has led to the use of Lachesis in syphilis. It is sufficiently similar to cope with the severe forms of nasal syphilis; syphilis where it has affected the nasal mucous membrane, producing- crusts and finally affecting the bones. Foetid ozaena; very offensive discharges from the nose. Bleeding from the nose need not surprise you, because Lachesis is a haemmorrhagic remedy. The blood from the nose or any part, when it dries or clots, looks like charred straw or becomes black. Parts bleed easily. Copious and prolonged uterine haemorrhage, copious and prolonged menstruation, bleeding from the nose, vomiting of blood, haemorrhage from the bowels in typhoids. "Great sensitiveness of the nostrils and lips, swelling of the lips, great swelling and tumefaction of the nose in old cases of syphilis. The nose swells up and becomes purple. The nasal bones are very sore, soreness upon sides of the nose. Lachesis is an especially useful medicine in old drunkards who have red nose, and in heart affections with red nose. A red knob on the end of the nose, a strawberry nose.
The face is purple and mottled, the eyelids are tumid, very much puffed; not bloated as in oedematous subjects, but puffed. There is not the pitting upon pressure that we find in oedema, although Lachesis has that, but there is a puffiness peculiar to Lachesis, the face looks swollen and inflamed, due to a venous stasis, so that the face is purple and mottled. The nose is tumid, yet it will not remain pitted upon pressure. The lips feel as if inflamed, yet are not inflamed, simply sensitive to pressure. The face has also an oedematous appearance in which there is pitting upon pressure, in cardiac affections, in cases of Bright's disease. On the other hand the face becomes very pale, pale and cold; the skin covered with scaly eruptions. Eruptions that bleed easily, with crusty eruptions, with vesicular eruptions. Eruptions that fill with blood, bloody vesicles and large blood blisters, such as occur sometimes in burns, with burning. The face becomes jaundiced and very sallow. At times it takes on the appearance also of a chlorosis. If you have once seen the chlorotic color, it need not be described. It is a condition of anaemia, with yellowish pallor, ash colored or grey, intermingled with a sort of greenish color, so that the ancients often referred to it as green sickness. Again the face becomes livid and puffed like the bloated aspect of drunkards, the mottled purple appearance of drunkards who have been drinking for years, until they are bloated and broken down and have a besotted aspect. You see that in Lachesis.
In Lachesis we have a remedy for erysipelas and gangrenous affections, and about the affected part there is the Lachesis appearance, that is the mottled, purplish appearance. Lachesis has become clinically a marked remedy for erysipelas and for gangrene. As provers do not follow up remedies until they produce these things, we have to gather them from the poisonous effects and clinical observation.
In Lachesis there is oozing of blood around the teeth, the gums bleed easily. Dry crusts appear upon the teeth in zymotic diseases, often black formations, sordes, and the tongue takes part in the appearance of the mouth and becomes slick. This occurs in typhoid conditions when there is a total loss of assimilation, the appetite is entirely gone, the stomach will not take food, and when food is put into the stomach it is rejected. There is also paresis of the tongue. The tongue seems to be like leather in the mouth, it is moved with great difficulty. And the speech is like that of one half intoxicated; he is unable to articulate. The tongue swells and is protruded very slowly. It is dry and catches on the teeth and seems to have lost its stiffness. Seems like a rag, or as if the muscles did not act upon it so that it cannot be protruded, or if it is protruded it trembles and quivers and jerks and catches on the teeth. Again it is swollen, it is denuded of its papillae, and smooth, shiny and glassy as if varnished. In the mouth there is a soapy appearance of the saliva. The saliva runs into the mouth copiously and the patient will often lie with the head over the side of the bed, and the saliva dripping into a pan or commode. The saliva is stringy and can be pulled out of the mouth in strings; white mucus or saliva. This is not an uncommon feature in diphtheria, in sore throat, in inflammation of the tongue and mouth and gums, and in inflammation of the salivary glands. When this mucus is thick, tough, yellow, stringy and ropy it is like Kali bichromicum. You will often find in severe sore throat that the patient will lie and gag, and cough, and attempt with difficulty to protrude the tongue to expel the saliva from the mouth. Very often the pain is so severe in the root of the tongue that he cannot expel the saliva by the tongue and he will lie with the open mouth over a commode, or with a cloth over the pillow, to receive the thick, ropy saliva. In such a state with sore throats, especially those that commence on the left side and go to the right, you hardly need to question longer, for it is the aspect of Lachesis. This state of affairs would lead to Lachesis in ordinary inflammatory conditions of the tongue and in cancerous affections of the tongue. Lach. has in its nature the tendency to formation of malignant scabs and malignant ulcers, such as we find in epithelioma. It has cured a number of cases of epithelioma. It has been a. very useful remedy in lupus. It is an important remedy in syphilitic sore throat, in syphilitic ulceration of the throat, tongue and roof of the mouth with this copious, stringy saliva.
The muscles of the pharynx become paralyzed and will not act, and hence the food will collect in the pharynx, that is, the bolus to be swallowed goes to the pharynx and stops, and then a tremendous effort at swallowing, with gagging and coughing and spasmodic action of the chest, takes place in order to carry on respiration, and he will not again attempt it. This state often occurs with diphtheria. I have a number of times seen it brought about by *the physician, who has, instead of giving just enough Lachesis, high enough and similar enough to the disease to cure, given it as low as he could get it, the 8th or 10th, dissolved it in water and fed it all through the diphtheritic state. When you come across cases that have been treated in this way you need not be surprised if a post-diphtheritic paralysis comes on, because Lachesis will produce it. It may cure the diphtheria, but it will leave its poisonous effects which will last that patient a lifetime. Every spring the symptoms of Lachesis will crop out. In all the circumstances of aggravation described the symptoms of Lachesis will crop out if he has once been poisoned by it.
In the sore throat we have a combination of symptoms. Lachesis has produced this state; going from left to right; but with the sore throat there is a sensation of fullness in the neck and throat, difficult breathing, pallor or plethoric appearance of the face, choking when going into sleep, the peculiar kind of saliva and aggravation of the throat symptoms from warm drinks. There is not always an aggravation of the pain itself from warm drinks, but the patient is often unable to swallow warm fluids. The swallowing of warm fluids often causes choking, and after a swallow of warm tea is taken the patient will clutch at the throat and it seems as if he would suffocate. He says, "Oh! Do not give me any more warm drinks." Something cold will relieve. The dyspnoea and the distress about the throat is increased by swallowing something warm. Now, in the sore throats of Lycopodium, warmth often benefits, but it is also true in some cases of Lycopodium sore throat, they want cold drinks and cold feels good to the throat.
Very often in the more acute symptoms of Lachesis a warm drink in the stomach is hurtful and causes nausea and suffocation and increases the choking and palpitation and the fullness in the head, whereas in the chronic cases of Lachesis, those that have been poisoned years before, there will be a sensation of nausea and tendency to vomit from taking a drink of cold water and then lying down. The nausea comes on after lying down, that is, let the patient take a drink of ice cold water and go to bed and nausea will come on. Such a state is peculiar to Lachesis. It has been a later observation of those who have long before proved Lachesis. The symptoms of Lachesis have sometimes to be taken years after.
Lachesis has ulcers in the throat. It has aphthous patches, it has red and grey ulceration, it has deep ulceration. The tendency to ulceration upon the margins of mucous membranes is peculiar to Lachesis. Also ulceration upon the skin, where the circulation is feeble. It seems that the pain in the throat is particularly marked between the acts of swallowing, and the pressure of the bolus going over the inflamed tonsils relieves the pain. Always choking when swallowing, choking and gagging in the throat. The cough is a choking cough and produces a sensation of tickling. This is like the Bell. cough. Bell. antidotes a Lach. cough, it has a cough so much like Lach. that no one can tell them apart. Again the throat takes on extreme dryness in Lach., and this dryness is without thirst, dryness with aversion to water. Much inclination to swallow; the tendency is to continuously swallow, yet it is painful. Empty swallowing is more painful than the swallowing of solids. Some Lach. patients suffering from cardiac affections are annoyed with constriction of the throat, choking in the throat when anything warm is swallowed, and sometimes when going into a warm room, choking and palpitation of the heart. Tendency to chronic sore throat or recurrent sore throat and ulceration with every recurring sore throat. Liquids, of course, you will see, are analogous to empty swallowing, and empty swallowing causes more pain than the bolus which presses upon the sore throat, because it is of the nature of a slight touch. The slight touch increases the soreness and pain in the throat. Slight pressure of the collar increases the pain in the throat. With the sore throat the muscles and glands about the neck become painful, inflamed and swollen, and very tender to the touch. With the sore threat, very commonly, there is pain in the base of the brain or in the back of the head, and soreness of the muscles of the back of the neck, which is often relieved by lying on the back and aggravated by lying on either side. If you look into the throat it has a mottled, purplish appearance. Put all these things together, with the copious flow of tenacious saliva, and you will be able to manage cases of diphtheria that commence on the left side and spread to the right, whether the membrane is scanty or copious. Tonsilitis with suppuration of the tonsils, when the left tonsil becomes inflamed and after a day or two the right one becomes inflamed and swollen, and they both finally go on to suppuration, or when one swells and suppurates and the other swells and supporates. Diphtheritic appearances of the throat, spreading from left to right. The pharynx is full of thick, white, ropy mucus in the morning; must hawk out a mouthful of mucus in the morning.
The abdomen is distended with flatus. The abdomen is tympanitic in typhoid condition, much rumbling in the distended abdomen. The clothing cannot be tolerated, not even the slightest touch of the clothing, and yet it may require hard pressure to bring out soreness that is deep in the abdomen. This state is as it is in inflammation of bowels, ovaries and uterus, the patient lies on the back with the clothing lifted from the abdomen. Violent, labor-like pains, menstrual colic, present in typhoid, in puerperal fever, in malignant scarlet fever, in the more malignant affections or zymotic forms of the continued fever.
Lach. has a series of liver troubles with jaundice; congestion of the liver, inflammation of the liver, enlarged liver and the nutmeg liver. Cutting like a knife in the region of the liver. Vomiting of bile; vomiting of everything taken into the stomach. Extreme nausea; continuous nausea with jaundice. White stool. It has cured cases with gall stone. "Cannot endure any pressure about the hypochondria." In the chronic state the sensitiveness of the skin is so great over the abdomen, and about the waist and hips, that the wearing of the clothing creates pain, great restlessness and uneasiness, the patient grows increasingly nervous and finally goes into hysterics. Sensitiveness over the lower abdomen; can scarcely allow her clothes to touch her.
It seems strange at first reading that Lachesis can be such a common remedy at the menstrual period. It is also laid down as a remedy for the climacteric period. Now if you will study the cases of many women at the climacteric period you will find that many of them have the flushes of heat and the surgings in the head and the great circulatory disturbances that are found under Lachesis. This is also true of the complaints, the headaches, etc., that come in women at the climacteric period and at the menstrual period. The Lachesis symptoms are strong in women during menstruation. There is violent headache, boring pain in the vertex, nausea and vomiting during menses.
The discharge in the female, either as a menstrual flow or as a haemorrhage, is black blood. Pain in the left ovarian region, or going from left to right. Induration of one or both ovaries. It has cured suppuration of the ovaries. The uterine region is very sensitive to touch, to the slightest contact of the clothing; in inflammation of the ovaries, pains in the ovaries and uterus going from left to right. Pains in the pelvis going upwards to the chest, sometimes a surging of pain going upwards, grasping the throat. Labor pains surge up, with clutching at the throat, or the labor pains cease suddenly, with clutching at the throat. The menstrual pains increase violently until relieved by the flow. The menstrual sufferings are before and after the flow, with amelioration during the flow. The menstrual flow intermits one day and then goes on for one day, and during the intermission there is likely to be pain or headache. Menorrhagia with chills at night and flushes of heat in the daytime. During the menstrual period violent headache, especially at such times as the flow slackens up. It is a general feature of Lachesis to be relieved by discharges. Catamenia flow but one hour every day; on stopping, violent pains follow in region of left ovary, alternating with gagging and vomiturition.
It is especially useful at the menopause, because of the flushes of heat. Uterine haemorrhage, fainting spells, suffocation in a warm room; orgasm of blood most violent. Complaints during pregnancy. Inflammation of the veins of the leg. Varicose veins, blue or purple, extreme sensitiveness along the veins; sensitive to the slightest touch, though relieved by pressure.
This study of Lachesis is only a commentary on some of its important parts.
LYCOPODIUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Lycopodium is an antipsoric, anti-syphilitic and anti-sycotic, and its sphere is broad and deep. Though classed among the inert substances, and thought to be useful only for rolling up allopathic pills, Hahnemann brought it into use and developed its power by attenuation. It is a monument to Hahnemann. It enters deep into the life, and ultimate changes in the soft tissues, blood-vessels, bones, liver, heart, joints. The tissue changes are striking; there is tendency to necrosis, abscesses, spreading ulcers and great emaciation. There is a predominance of symptoms on the right side of the body, and they are likely to travel from right to left or from above downward, a. g., from head to chest. The patient emaciates above, especially about the neck, while the lower extremities are fairly well nourished. Externally there is sensitiveness to a warm atmosphere when there are head and spine symptoms. The head symptoms also are worse from the warmth of the bed and from heat, and worse from getting heated by exertion. The patient is sensitive to cold and there is a marked lack of vital heat, and worse in general from cold and cold air and from cold food and drinks. The pains are ameliorated from warmth except of the head and spine. Exertion aggravates the Lycopodium patient in general. He becomes puffed and distressed, and dyspnoea is increased by exertion. He cannot climb, he cannot walk fast. The cardiac symptoms are increased as well as the dyspnoea by becoming heated from exertion. The inflamed parts are sometimes relieved from the application of heat. The throat symptoms are generally relieved from the application of heat, from drinking hot tea or warm soup. The stomach pains are often relieved by warm drinks and taking warm things into the stomach. Nervous excitement and prostration are marked.
In the rheumatic pains and other sufferings the Lyc. patient is ameliorated by motion. He is extremely restless, must keep turning, and if there is inflammation with the aches and pains the patient is better from the warmth of the bed and relieved from motion, and he will keep tossing all night. He turns and gets into a new place and thinks he can sleep, but the restlessness continues all night. He wants cool air, wants to be in a cool place with head symptoms. It is true that the headache is worse from motion enough to warm the patient up, but not from the motion itself. The headache is worse from lying down and from the warmth of the room, and better in cold air and from motion until he has moved and exercised sufficiently to become heated, when the headache becomes worse. That is quite an important thing to remember concerning Lycopodium, because it may constitute a distinguishing feature. The head symptoms are worse from warm wraps and warm bed.
The complaints of Lyc. are likely to be worse at a fixed time, viz., from four till eight o'clock in the evening. An exacerbation comes on in the acute complaints and often in the chronic complaints at this time. The Lyc. chill and fever is worse at this time, and in typhoid and scarlet fever the patient is especially worse from 4-8 P. M. In gouty attacks, in rheumatic fevers, in inflammatory conditions, in pneumonia, in acute catarrhs, which are complaints especially calling for Lycopodium, it is always well to think of this remedy when there is a decisive aggravation from 4-8 P. M.
The Lycopodium patient is flatulent, distended like a drum, so that he can hardly breathe. The diaphragm is pushed upwards, infringing upon the lung and heart space, so that he has palpitation, faintness and dyspnoea. It is not uncommon to hear a Lycop. patient say, "Everything I eat turns into wind." After a mere mouthful he becomes flatulent and distended, so that he cannot eat any more. He says a mouthful fills him up to the throat. While the abdomen is distended he is so nervous that he cannot endure any noise. The noise of the crackling of paper, ringing of bells or slamming of doors goes through him and causes fainting, like Ant. crud., Bora.r and Natr. mur. These general conditions go through all complaints, acute and chronic. There is an excitable stage of the whole sensorium in which everything disturbs. Little things annoy and distress.
The Lyc. patient cannot eat oysters; they make him sick. Oysters seem to poison the Lyc. patient, just as onions are a poison to the Thuja patient. The Oxalic acid patient cannot eat strawberries. If you ever have a patient get sick from eating strawberries, tomatoes or oysters, and you have no homoeopathic remedies at hand, it is a good thing to remember that cheese will digest strawberries or tomatoes or oysters in a few minutes.
The skin ulcerates. There are painful ulcers, sloughing ulcers beneath the skin, abscesses beneath the skin, cellular troubles. The chronic ulcerations arc indolent with false granulations, painful, burning, stinging and smarting, often relieved by applying cooling things and aggravated by warm poultices. It is somewhat a general in Lycopodium that warm poultices and warmth ameliorates; warm applications ameliorate the pain in the knee, the suppurating condition and the gouty troubles. In an unusually warm bed, and in a warm room hives come out. The hives come out either in nodules or in long and irregular stripes, especially in the heat, and itching violently. Lyc. has eruptions upon the skin, with violent itching. Vesicles and scaly eruptions, moist eruptions and dry eruptions, furfuraceous eruptions, eruptions about the lips, behind the ears, under the wings of the nose and upon the genitals; fissured eruptions, bleeding fissures like salt rheum upon the hands. The skin becomes thick and indurated. The sites of old boils and pustules become indurated and form nodules that remain a long time. The skin looks unhealthy, and it will slough easily; wounds refuse to heal. Surface wounds suppurate as if they had contained splinters, and this suppuration burrows along under the skin. Ulcers bleed and form great quantities of thick, yellow, offensive, green pus. Chancers and chancroids often find their simillimum in Lyc.
The Lyc. state when deciphered shows feebleness throughout. A very low state of the arteries and veins, poor tone and poor circulation. Numbness in spots. Emaciation of single members. Deadness of the fingers and toes. Staggering and inability to make use of the limbs. Clumsiness and awkwardness of the limbs. Trembling of the limbs.
The mental symptoms of Lyc. are numerous. He is tired. He has a tired state of the mind, a chronic fatigue, forgetfulness, aversion to undertaking anything new, aversion to appearing in any new role, aversion to his own work. Dreads lest something will happen, lest he will forget something. A continually increasing dread of appearing in public comes on, yet a horror, at times, of solitude. Often in professional men, like lawyers and ministers, who have to appear in public, there is a feeling of incompetence, a feeling of inability to undertake his task, although he has been accustomed to it for many years. A lawyer cannot think of appearing in court; he procrastinates, he delays until he is obliged to appear, because he has a fear that he will stumble, that he will make mistakes, that he will forget, and yet when he undertakes it he goes through with ease and comfort. This is a striking feature also of Silicea. No medicines have this fear so marked as these two.
Lyc. also has a religious insanity, which has a mild and simple beginning, a matter of melancholy. This religious melancholy grows greater and greater until he sits and broods. He has very often aversion to company, and yet he dreads solitude. "Dread of men and dread of solitude; irritability and melancholy." This dread of men is not always a state of dread in women. It is a dread of people, and when that is fully carried out in the Lyc. patient you see that she dreads the presence of new persons, or the coming in of friends or
visitors; she wants to be only with those that are constantly surrounding her; does not want to be entirely alone; wants to feel that there is somebody in the house, but does not want company; does not want to be talked to, or forced to do anything; does not want to make any exertion, yet at times when forced to do so she is relieved. "Taciturnity, desires to be alone." Now, let us follow that out a little further. The taciturnity is because the patient does not want to talk, wants to keep silent, yet, as I have said already, very glad to feel there is somebody else in the house and that she is not alone. She is perfectly willing to remain in a little room by herself, so that she is practically alone, yet not in solitude. If there were two adjacent rooms in the house you would commonly find the Lyc. patient go into one and stay there, but very glad to have somebody in the other.
The Lycopodium patient often weeps in the act of receiving a friend or meeting an acquaintance. An unusual sadness with weeping comes over this patient on receiving a gift. At the slightest joy she weeps, hence we see that the Lyc, patient is a very nervous, sensitive, emotional patient. Here it is: "Sensitive, even cries when thanked."
When lying in bed suffering from the lower forms of fevers, there is delirium and even unconsciousness. He picks at imaginary things in the air, sees flies and all sorts of little things flying in the air. "Excessively merry and laughs at simplest things." A condition of insanity. "Despondent." The Lyc. patient wakes up in the morning with sadness. There is sadness and gloom. The world may come to an end, or the whole family may die, or the house may burn up. There seems to be nothing cheering, the future looks black. After moving about a while, this passes off. This state precedes conditions of insanity, and finally a suicidal state comes, an aversion to life. See .how this remedy takes hold of the will and actually destroys man's will to live. That which is first in man is his desire to be, to exist, and to be something, if ever so small. When that is destroyed, we see what a wonderful thing has been destroyed. The very man himself wills then not to be. It is a perversion of everything that makes the man, the destruction of his will. "Apprehensiveness, difficult breathing and fearfulness." "Anxious thoughts as if about to die." "Want of self-confidence, indecision, timidity, resignation." Loss of confidence in himself and in everything. "Misanthropic, flies even from his own children." "Distrustful, suspicious and fault finding." "Oversensitive to pain; patient is beside himself."
Lyc. is subject to periodical headaches, and headaches connected with gastric troubles. If he goes beyond his dinner hour a sick headache will come on. He must eat with regularity or he will have the headache which he is subject to. This is somewhat like a Cactus headache. Cactus has a congestive headache which becomes extremely violent with flushed face if he does not eat at the regular time. One distinguishing feature is that with the Lycopodium headache, if he eats something, the headache is better while the Cactus headache is worse from eating. Lyc. and especially Phos. and Psorinum have headaches with great hunger. At or about the beginning of the attack there is a faint all-gone hungry feeling which eating does not satisfy. Such is the nature of Phosphorus and Psorinum when the appetite and headache are associated. The Lycopodium headache is < from heat, from the warmth of the bed, and from lying down, > from cold, from the cold air, and from having the windows open. Lean, emaciated boys are subject to prolonged pains in the head. Every time this little fellow takes cold he has a prolonged, throbbing, congestive headache, and from day to day and from month to month he becomes more emaciated, especially about the face and neck. This same trouble is present when a narrow-chested boy has a dry, teasing cough, without expectoration, and emaciates about the neck and face. This remedy is especially suitable in these withered lads, with a dry cough or prolonged headache. In children who wither after pneumonia or bronchitis, emaciate about the face and neck, take cold on the slightest provocation, suffer with headache from being heated, have nightly headaches, and a state of congestion that affects the mind more or less, in which they rouse out of sleep in confusion. The little one screams out in sleep, awakes frightened, looks wild, does not know the father and mother, or nurse, or family until after a few moments, when he seems to be able to collect his senses and then realizes where he is and lies down to sleep again. In a little while he wakes up again in a fright, looks strange and confused. That repeats itself. The headaches are throbbing and pressing, as if the head would burst,; but this is not so important as the manner in which they come on, the circumstance of their cause, the things that the child does and the fact that they are better from cold, worse from noise and talking, worse from 4 to 8 P. M., and he emaciates from above downward. These are more important than the quality of the pain that the patient feels, but if he describes the quality of the pain it is spoken of as a throbbing, pressing, bursting or as a fullness.
Upon the scalp we find eruptions in patches, smooth patches with the hair off. Patches on the face and eczematous eruptions behind the ears, bleeding and oozing a watery fluid, sometimes yellowish watery.
The eczema spreads from behind the ears up over the ears and to the scalp. Lyc. is a very important remedy to study in eczema of the infant. Eczema in a lean, hungry, withering child with more or less head trouble, such as has been described, with a moist oozing behind the ears, red sand in the urine, face looking wrinkled, a dry teasing cough, in a child that kicks the covers off, a child whose left foot is cold and the other warm, with capricious appetite, eating much, with unusual hunger at times and great thirst, and yet losing steadily, will often be cured by Lyc. It will throw out a greater amount of eruption at first, but this will subside finally and the child will return to health. The head in general is closely related to one symptom, viz., red sand in the urine. As long as the red sand is plentiful, the patient is free from these congestive headaches, but when the urine becomes pale and free from the red pepper deposit, then comes the bursting, pressing headache, lasting for days. It might be said that this is a uraemic headache; but it does not matter what you call it, if the symptoms are present the remedy will be justified. In old gouty constitutions, when the headache is most marked, the gout in the extremities will be > and vice versa. The headache is present only in the absence of pain in the extremities. Again, when there is a copious quantity of red sand in the urine the gouty state, either in the head or extremities, will be absent, but whenever he takes cold the secretion seems to slacken up with an < of the pain. There is another feature of the Lyc. headache related to catarrhal states. The headache is < when the catarrh is slacked up by an acute cold. The Lye. subject often suffers from thick, yellow discharge from the nose. The nose is filled with yellow, green crust, blown out of the nose in the morning and hawked out of the throat. Now, when the patient takes cold the thick discharge to a great extent ceases, and he commences to sneeze and has a watery discharge. Then comes on a Lyc. headache, with great suffering, with pressing pains, with hunger, and finally the coryza passes away, and the thick yellow discharge returns and the headache subsides.
We have many eye symptoms in Lycopodium, but most prominent are the catarrhal affections of the eyes. The symptoms are so numerous they describe almost any catarrhal condition of the eyes, so that you cannot discriminate upon the eye symptoms alone. Inflammatory conditions with copious discharge, with red eyes, ulceration of the conjunctiva and lids, and granular lids.
For the cars Lyc. becomes an important remedy, because this selfsame emaciating child, with the wrinkled countenance and dry cough, has had, since an attack of scarlet fever, a discharge from the ears, thick, yellow and offensive, with loss of hearing. If the suitable remedy be given in a case of scarlet fever, there will be no ear trouble left, because ear troubles do not necessarily belong to scarlet fever. They are not a part of scarlet fever, but are dependent on the constitutional state of the child. Lyc. has also most painful eruptions of the ears, otitis media, abscess in the ear, associated with eczema about the ears and behind the ears.
The nose symptoms I have only partly described in association with the head. The trouble often begins in infancy. The little infant will lie at first with a peculiar rattling breathing through the nose, and finally it will breathe only through the mouth, as the nose is obstructed. This goes on for days and months. The child breathes only through the mouth, and when it cries it has the shrill tone, such as is found when the nose is plugged up. If you look you will see the nose is filled up with a purulent matter and hanging down the throat is a muco-purulent discharge. Much stuffing up of the nose is a chronic state of Lyc. The child will go on with this trouble until it forms into great crusts, yellow, sometimes blackish, sometimes greenish, and the nose bleeds. It is most useful in those troublesome catarrhs associated with headaches; in such patients as lose flesh about the neck. It may seem strange and unaccountable that Lyc. can cause emaciation about the neck and shriveling of the face when the lower limbs are in a very good state of preservation. In old chronic catarrhs of adults they must keep continually blowing the nose. He cannot breathe through the nose at night, as crusts form in all portions of the mucous membranes. Crusty nostrils with eczema, with oozing eruptions about the face and nose. The mucous discharge is almost as thick and tenacious as in Kali The face is sallow, sickly, pale, often withered, shriveled and emaciated. In deep-seated chest troubles, bronchitis or pneumonia, where the chest is filled up with mucus, it will be seen that the face and forehead are wrinkled from pain, and that the wings of the nose flap with the effort to breathe. This occurs with all forms of dyspnoea. We see something like it in Ant, tart., the sooty nostrils being wide open and flapping: In Ant. tart. the rattling of the mucus is heard across the room and the patient is seen to be in distress, but if you see the patient lying in bed with the nose flapping and the forehead wrinkled, with rattling in the chest, or a dry, hacking cough and no expectoration, you will often find the particulars of the examination confirm your mind that it is a case for Lyc. In the exudative stage of pneumonia, the stages of hepatisation, Lyc. may save the life of that patient. It is closely related in the period of hepatisation to Phos. and Sulph. The Sulph. patient is cold; there is no tendency to reaction, he feels the load in the chest, and examination of the chest shows that hepatisation is marked. He wants to lie still and is evidently about to die. Sulphur will help him. It does not have the flapping of the nose, nor the wrinkles upon the forehead, like Lyc. In the brain complaints of Strammonium the forehead wrinkles, and in the chest complaints of Lyc. the forehead wrinkles, and their wrinkles are somewhat alike. You go to a semi-conscious patient suffering from cerebral congestion and watch him; he is wild, the eyes are glassy, the forehead wrinkled and the tendency is to activity of the mind. That is not Lyc. but Strain. By close observation these practical things will lead you to distinguish, almost instantaneously, between Strammonium in its head troubles, and Lyc. in the advanced stage of pneumonia.
The face is often covered with copper-colored eruptions, such as we find in syphilis, and hence it is that Lyc. is sometimes useful in old cases of syphilis, cases which have affected the nose, with necrosis or caries of the nasal bones, and the catarrhal symptoms already described. About the face also there is much twitching. You will see by the study of the face that his face conforms to his sensations. He is an over-sensitive patient, and at every jar or noise, such as the slamming of a door, or the ringing of a bell, he wrinkles his face. He is disturbed, and you see it expressed upon his countenance. He has a sickly wrinkled countenance, with contracted eyebrows in complaints of the abdomen as well as in chest complaints. We also see that the jaw drops as in Opium and Muriatic acid. This occurs in a state marked by great exhaustion and indicates a fatal tendency. It is especially marked in typhoid when the patient picks at the bed clothes, slides down in bed, wants almost nothing, and can hardly be aroused. It is the expression of the last stage of the disease, a low type of fever, typhoids, septic and zymotic diseases. Under the jaw there is often glandular swelling, swelling of the parotid and submaxillary glands. The swelling is sometimes cellular and the neck muscles are involved. The tendency is to suppuration of these glands, and swellings about the neck in scarlet fever and diphtheria.
The next important feature we notice are the throat symptoms. It was mentioned when going over the general state that the striking feature of Lyc. in regard to direction is that its symptoms seem to spread from right to left; we notice that the right foot is cold and the left is warm; the right knee is affected; if the pains are movable they go from right to left. Most complaints seem to travel from right to left, or to affect the right side more than the left. This is also true of sore throats; a quinsy affecting the right side will run its course, and when about finished the left tonsil will become inflamed and suppurate if the appropriate remedy be not administered. The common sore throat will commence on the right side, the next day both sides will be affected, the inflammation having extended to the left side. This remedy has all kinds of pains in the throat and fauces. It is useful in cases of diphtheria when the membrane commences on the right side of the throat and spreads over towards the left. Patches will be seen one day on the right side and the next day on the left side. We have noticed also that complaints in Lyc. spread from above down, so it is with these exudations. They often commence in the upper part of the pharynx and spread down into the throat. Lyc. has cured many such cases. It is the case sometimes that Lyc. is better by holding cold water in the mouth, but the usual Lyc. sore throat is better from swallowing warm drinks. It is a feature whereby it is possible to distinguish Lachesis from Lycopodium. Lachesis is better from cold and has spasms of the throat from attempting to drink warm drinks, while Lyc. is better from warm drinks, though sometimes better from cold drinks. Lyc. does not sleep into the suffocation and constriction of the throat and dyspnoea as in Lach. The throat is extremely painful, it has all the violence of the worst cases of diphtheria. It has the zymosis.
The stomach and abdominal symptoms are intermingled. There is a sense of satiety, an entire lack of appetite. He feels so full that he cannot eat. This sense of fullness may not come on until he has swallowed a mouthful of food; he goes to the table hungry, but the first mouthful fills him up. After eating he is distended with flatus, and gets momentary relief from belching, yet he remains distended. Nausea and vomiting; gnawing pains in stomach as in gastritis; catarrh; burning in ulcers and cancer; pains immediately after eating; vomiting of bile, coffee ground vomit, black, inky vomit. Under Lyc. apparently malignant cases have their life prolonged. The case is so modified that, instead of culminating in a few months, the patient may last for years. Right hypochondrium swollen as in liver troubles. Pain in liver, recurrent bilious attacks with vomiting of bile. He is subject to gall stone colic. After Lyc. the attacks come less frequently, the bilious secretion becomes normal and the gall stones have a spongy appearance as though being dissolved. Lyc. patients are always belching; they have eructations that are sour and acrid like strong acid burning the pharynx. "Sour stomach," sour vomiting, flatus, distension and pain after eating, with a sense of fullness. Awful "goneness," or weakness, in stomach, not relieved by eating (Digit.). The stomach is worse by cold drinks, and often relieved by warm drinks. In the stomach and intestines there is a great commotion, noisy rumbling, rolling of flatus as though fermentation were going on. Lyc., China and Carbo veg. are most flatulent remedies and should be compared. The stomach symptoms are worse or brought on from cold drinks, beer, coffee or fruit, and a diarrhoea follows. Old chronic dyspeptics, emaciated, wrinkled, tired and angular patients, everything eaten turns to wind. Lycopodium is useful in old tired patients with feeble reaction and feebleness of all the functions, with a tendency to run down and not convalesce.
This patient has most troublesome constipation. He goes for days without any desire, and although the rectum is full there is no urging. Inactivity of intestinal canal. Ineffectual urging to stool. Stool hard, difficult, small and incomplete. The first part of the stool is hard and difficult to start, but the last part is soft or thin and gushing followed by faintness and weakness. Lyc. patients have diarrhoea and all kinds of stool. So you will see from reading the text that the characteristic of Lyc. is not in the stool. Any kind of diarrhoea, if the other Lyc. symptoms are present, will be cured by Lyc. It has troublesome haemorrhoids, but they are nondescript. Any kind of haemorrhoids may be cured by Lyc. if the flatulence, the stomach symptoms, the mental symptoms, and the general symptoms of Lyc. are present, because the haemorrhoidal symptoms are numerous.
The kidneys furnish many symptoms and may be the key to Lycopodium in many instances. There seems to be the same inactivity in the bladder as in the rectum. Though he strain ever so much, he must wait a long time for the urine to pass. It is slow to flow, and flows in a feeble stream. The urine is often muddy with brick dust, or red sand deposits, or on stirring it up it looks like the sediment of fermenting cider. We find this state in febrile conditions. In acute stages of disease, where the red sand appears copiously, Lyc. is often the remedy. This is a very prominent symptom. In chronic symptoms when the patient feels best the red sand is found in the urine.
Lyc. has retention of urine and suppression of urine. It has "wetting of the bed" in little ones, involuntary micturition in sleep, involuntary micturition in typhoids and low fevers. A marked feature of Lyc., and one of the most prominent of all remedies, is polyuria during the night. He must arise many times at night and pass large quantities of urine, although in the daytime the urine is normal. Enormous quantities of urine, very clear and of light specific gravity.
Male sexual organs. One of the most prominent remedies in impotency. Persons of feeble vitality, overwrought persons, overtired persons, with feeble genital organs, seldom need Phosphorus, but
Lycopod is a typical remedy where the young man has abused himself by secret vices and has become tired out in his spine, brain and genital organs. If this patient makes up his mind that he will live a somewhat decent life and marries, he finds that he is impotent sexually, that he is not able to obtain erections, or that the erections are too feeble, or too short, and that he is not a man.
Lyc. has inflammation of the mucous membrane of the urethra, with a gonorrhoeal discharge. It is an anti-sycotic and has troublesome fig warts upon the male and female genitals. "Moist condylomata on the penis, enlargement of the prostate gland."
It is a great friend of the woman in inflammation and neuralgia of the ovaries, and in inflammation of the uterus. The neuralgia especially affects the right ovary, with a tendency to the left. Inflammation of the ovaries, when the right is more affected than the left. It has cured cystic tumors of the right ovary.
Lycopodium produces and cures dryness in the vagina in which coition becomes very painful. Burning in the vagina during and after coition. It has disturbance of menstruation. Absence or suppression of menses for many months, the patient being withered, declining, pale and sallow, becoming feeble. It seems that she has not the vitality to menstruate. It is also suitable in girls at puberty when the time for the first menstrual flow to appear has come, but it does not come. She goes on to 15, 16, 17 or 18 without development, the breasts do not enlarge, the ovaries do not perform their functions. When the symptoms agree Lyc. establishes a reaction, the breasts begin to grow, the womanly bearing begins to come, and the child becomes a woman. It has a wonderful power for developing, and in that respect it is very much like Calc. phos. "Discharge of flatus from the vagina." "Varices of the genitals."
In the respiratory organs Lyc. furnishes a wonderful remedy. Dyspnoea and asthmatic breathing in catarrh of the chest. The colds settle in the nose, but nearly always go into the chest, with much whistling and wheezing, and great dyspnoea. The dyspnoea is worse from walking fast, after exertion and from going up a hill. Throbbing, burning and tickling in the chest. Dry, teasing cough. Dry cough in emaciated boys. After coming out of pneumonia, the dry, teasing cough remains a long time, or there is much whistling and asthmatic breathing. The extremities are cold while the head and face are hot, with much coughing and troubles in the chest. He wants to go about with the head uncovered, because there is so much congestion in the head. This patient has a feeble reaction. There is no tendency to repair and the history of the case is that the troubles have existed since an attack of bronchitis or pneumonia. Besides the dry teasing cough, Lyc. goes into another state in which there is ulcera
tion, with copious expectoration of thick yellow or green muco-pus, tough and stringy. Finally night sweats, with fever in the afternoon from 4 to 8 o'clock, come on. Its use in the advanced stage of pneumonia, in the period of hepatisation, with the wrinkled face and brow, the flapping wings of the nose and scanty expectoration, we have already spoken of. Then it has marked catarrh of the chest with much rattling, especially in infants. Rattling in the chest, flapping of the wings of the nose and inability to expectorate. The right lung is most affected, or more likely to be affected than the left, or it is affected first in double pneumonia and troubles that go from one side to the other. Think of Lyc. among the remedies for neglected pneumonia, in difficult breathing from an accumulation of serum in the pleura and pericardium.
I have mentioned sufficiently the gouty tendencies of the limbs and the nerve symptoms. But there is a restlessness of the lower limbs which comes on when he thinks of going to sleep and this prevents sleep until midnight. Much like Arsenicum. It is often a very distressing feature. Numbness of the limbs. Drawing, tearing in the limbs at night; better by warmth of bed and motion. These pains are sometimes found in chronic intermittent fever and are cured by this remedy. Sciatica that comes on periodically, better by heat and walking. Varicose veins of the legs. One foot hot, the other cold. Oedema of the feet.
It has all manner of fevers, continued, intermittent and remittent. It is especially suitable in old age, and in premature old age, when a person at 6o years appears to be 8o years, broken down, feeble and tired. It is eminently suited in complaints of weakly constitutions. It is suitable in various dropsies, associated with liver and heart affections. Scabs remain upon the skin, do not separate; they crust over and the crust does not fall, or may become laminated like rupia. Sulphur, Graph. and Calc. are not longer acting or deeper acting than Lyc. These substances that seem to be so inert in their crude form come out strongest when potentized and form medicines of wonderful use.
MAGNESIA CARBONICA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This remedy has only been partially proved, and comes to us now as Hahnemann left it. The mental symptoms and symptoms of some portions of the body and particulars have not been fully brought out. The remedy really needs reproving with high potencies upon sensitive provers that the finer shades may be understood. I would not speak of it but for the fact that it relates to a class of cases so very important that you will not be able to get along without it. It is related to the older and deeper psoric sickness. It is deep acting and long acting and permeates the economy as thoroughly as Sulphur.
Some of the most striking general features are: Amelioration from motion; desire for open air, yet very sensitive to cold air; wants to be covered during all stages of fever; daily evening fevers; symptoms recurring every twenty-one days. Sensation of heat and even sweat from eating and drinking warm things; evening thirst.
Like other Magnesias; it has most violent neuralgic pains, pains along the course of nerves, pains so violent that he cannot keep still, and he moves about and is relieved by motion. The provers felt these pains mostly in the head and face, but clinical experience has demonstrated that it has violent neuralgias everywhere. We are justified, from the proving, in considering it as especially related to the left side of the face; neuralgia in the night; driving him out of bed, keeping him in constant motion. As soon as he stops moving the pain becomes very severe, shooting, tearing and cutting.
It has varied eruptions upon the skin; dry, scaly, dandruff-like eruptions upon the skin, very unhealthy hair and nails. Particularly does it affect the teeth and roots of the teeth. In every change of the weather the roots of the teeth become violently painful, burn, shoot and ache continuously. Toothache before and during menstruation. During pregnancy she suffers all the time with toothache, tearing pains in the left side of the face, although the roots of the teeth are perfectly sound. The hollow teeth are unusually sensitive, and painful. The teeth are so sensitive that they cannot be manipulated by the dentist. This is like Ant. crud., but Magnesia carb. especially affects the roots of the teeth while Ant. crud. affects the dentine more particularly. Sensitiveness of the teeth, so that he cannot bite upon the teeth, and the teeth feel too long. Magnesia carb. and China, when no other symptoms are present, are prominent remedies among the affections of the teeth during pregnancy.
There is a kind of marasmus that you will puzzle over if you do not know this remedy. If we analyze the remedy in general, we will see that it produces a state of the body like that prior to tuberculosis. He does not undergo repair, he loses flesh, and the muscles become flabby as if some serious disease were coming. In children of tuberculous parents there is that tendency to go into marasmus. The child's muscles are flabby, the child will not thrive in spite of feeding and medicines. It seems to be laying the foundations for some serious trouble. Finally, it emaciates and the back of the head begins to sink in, as if from atrophy of the cerebellum. The appetite increases for milk and meat and animal broths, and yet they are not digested, and when the milk is taken it continually passes the bowel in the form of white potter's clay, or like putty. The stool is soft and of the consistency of putty. If you go through a china factory where the men are forming with their hands, in such wonderful manner, all sorts of beautiful dishes,, and moulds, you will see that the original clay, as they are manipulating it, is white. It is a perfect picture of the Mag. carb. stool, composed of putty-like undigested milk.
I have observed, especially among illegitimate infants, those that have been conceived by clandestine coition, that they have a tendency to sinking in of the back of the head. The occipital bone will sink in, and the parietal bones jut out over it, and there will be a depression. That is not an uncommon thing in children that go into marasmus. They are very likely to have a potter's clay stool. It does not run, and it is not hard. The white, hard stool is quite another symptom, and the soft, semi-fluid white stool leads to another class of remedies, but this pasty stool, looking as if it could be moulded into any kind -of shape, is a Magnesia carb. stool. I once had in charge an orphanage, where we had sixty to one hundred babies on hand all the time. The puzzle of my life was to find remedies for the cases that were going into marasmus. A large number of them were clandestine babies. It was a sort of Sheltering Arms for these little ones. The whole year elapsed, and we were losing babies every week from this gradual decline, until I saw the image of these babies in Magnesia carb., and after that many of them were cured.
The Mag. carb. baby smells sour like the Hepar baby. Wash it as you will - and it smells sour; the perspiration is sour, and the whole baby smells sour. It is not especially the stool. The stool smells strong and pungent, putrid, and very often the whole child has a pungent odor, like an unclean baby, though it be well washed.
The Magnesias produce inactivity of the rectum and anus a paresis. The stool is large and hard, requiring great straining to expel. It is dry, hard and crumbling. The stool will remain partly expelled and then - crumble, breaking up in many pieces. Another stool that is laid down in the books as a most striking condition of Magnesia carb. is green; it is the diarrhoeic stool, and the green part floats upon the watery portion of the stool. The stool is often lumpy, and liquid. The Iumps lie in the bottom of the vessel, but floating upon the liquid Portion of the stool is the green like the scum of the frog pond. This is recognized as one of the most striking features. "Stools green, like scum on a frog pond; sour, frothy; with white floating lumps like tallow, bloody, mucous." Floating like lumps of tallow, is more characteristic of Phosphorus, and many a time has Dulcamara cured it.
The face of the chronic adult case is pale, waxy, sickly and sallow, and you wonder why this patient will not right up, and will not thrive. She has a sickly countenance, her muscles are lax, she becomes so tired and sweats upon little exertion. She is disturbed in every change of the weather, and is worse at the beginning of menstruation. She seems to take cold whenever menstruation is coming on. She says: "I know my menstrual period is coming on, because I have a cold in my head." Magnesia carb. has coryza every month before the monthly period. These patients take on an appearance as if going into decline, and yet they go on year after year unable to do anything, not able even to keep house, have a violent craving for meat and an aversion to vegetable food, grow thin and increasingly flabby, muscles relaxed, and with tendency to prolapsus. The walls of the abdomen have a tendency to fall down and to be relaxed, and the rings favor the formation of hernia. That is the kind of relaxation. The nerves are painful, and the muscles are tired. When you have such a case and have prescribed, and they persist in spite of every remedy, you know that the case does not well indicate a remedy, that the conditions are latent and there is a tendency to some grave internal disorder. The organs are threatening to break down; the kidneys, the heart, the lungs, or the brain are about to undergo organic change.
We have a catarrhal state in this remedy, but it is a dry catarrh, not much discharge. An old ulcer will dry up and become shiny and discharge almost nothing. The nose is dry and the eyeballs are so dry that the lids stick together and it is difficult to open the eyes. The skin becomes dry and itches and burns. Tendency to dryness of the mucous membranes and dryness of the skin. Dryness is a marked feature of this medicine.
"Inordinate appetite for meat in children." The stomach is a troublesome organ. The Magnesia carb. patient is always complaining of a sour stomach; sour eructations. Food comes up sour. There is nausea and coming up in the throat of sour food. Pains in the stomach after eating an ordinary amount of food; bloated after eating; much flatulence after eating. The stomach digests the food slowly and it becomes sour.
This remedy is especially useful if the history has been a tubercular one. Losing flesh and craving for meat in those who are tubercular or in those that are from tubercular parents. Patients suffering from a dry cough. Dry cough before the evening chill like Rhus lox. There are persons who have simply this tendency who go along year after year in this withered state, with the little hacking cough, not rousing up into much. Finally some favorable circumstance arises and the tuberculosis comes on rapidly after it has remained in a sluggish state for a long time. There are a few remedies more likely to be associated with that condition than any others, Arsenicum, Calc. carb., Lycopodium, Magnesia carb. and Tuberc. They fit into this lingering state, this prelude to active phthisis. They sometimes set a patient thriving, but, mind you, these cases are hard cases to manage. They are difficult to find remedies for. Their trouble is so latent, the symptoms do not come out, and sometimes you have to read between the lines. They are the one-sided cases spoken of by Hahnemann.
In addition to this dry, tickling cough, which is not mentioned in the books, we find "Cough, spasmodic at night from tickling in the larynx." "Sleepiness during the day and sleeplessness at night." When you have seen many of these cases that are threatening to go into phthisis, you will notice that it is a general feature with all of them. "Doctor, I am so tired in the morning; while I sleep some in the night, in the morning I feel as if I had not slept." Always tired and relaxed. Most of these subjects are cold and chilly. This state has not been brought out yet in the remedy, but clinically it relates to cold and chilly patients. Patients who say that they have not much blood.
MAGNESIA MURIATICA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
It would seem rather strange that the two remedies to which Hahnemann gave such a good start by proving and use should be so neglected and forgotten as Magnesia carb. and Magnesia mur. have been. These two, if used, would cure many of the liver troubles that are not now cured. Magnesia mur. could cure many conditions in nervous, excitable women that now go uncured. These remedies are neglected, while Phosphorus and Sulphur are prescribed for almost everything.
Magnesia mur. is a deep-acting antipsoric suited to nervous patients with stomach and liver troubles. It has enlarged glands and irritation of the nerve centers and brain. This patient is often sensitive to cold, chilly, but he desires fresh air and open air. Many of the complaints are ameliorated by the open, fresh air, but some head symptoms are an exception. The head must be covered, as it is so sensitive to the open air. He is extremely restless; only with great difficulty can he keep still, and if forced to keep still he becomes anxious. Anxiety is the marked feature. Restlessness, fidgetiness throughout the body, coupled with anxiety. This comes on at any time , but it is worse at night in bed and still worse on closing the eyes to go to sleep. When he closes the eyes he becomes so anxious, restless and fidgety that he must throw the covers off, take a long breath or do something. He is kept awake at night by the anxious feeling. It was described originally by the prover as an uneasiness, but in the Guiding Symptoms it is spoken of as a restlessness in bed. If you study the hysterical nature, the anxiety and restlessness, you will see it is throughout the whole economy and should be classed under mind and nerves. Some remedies have vertigo on closing the eyes, some have anxiety on closing the eyes. Conium has sweat on closing the eyes. These were the points used by keynote prescribers and sometimes good results were obtained. I remember once curing an organic stricture, which had been dilated but was no better. The patient described his symptoms and the stricture was all he could think of. I did not see his remedy and gave everything without relief. One day however, he told me he could not close his eyes to go to sleep without having a profuse sweat. I gave him Conium on that keynote alone, but it cured him of the sweat and the stricture, brought back an old gonorrhoeal discharge and resorption of the inflammatory material took place. A scientific prescriber would not do that; but when he heard that symptom he would not know it was in the nature of Conium to have the stricture, and in another case he would see that Conium did not suit, and he would know when and when not to give it.
Anxious in the room, ameliorated in the open air. Anxiety at night in bed on closing the eyes. While reading she felt as if someone were reading after her and she must read faster and faster. That occurs in patients who are tired from being worked up to the highest pitch and it seems as if they would fly to pieces. Any thought that comes into the mind tends to repeat itself.
Vertigo, ameliorated walking in the open air. Vertigo in the morning on rising. The head symptoms are troublesome. Silicea will be given in cases where this remedy should be given, because the Silicea headache is ameliorated from wrapping up the head. This remedy has it also. Soreness of the hair follicles. Sensation as if the hair were pulled. Headache ameliorated from tying a bandage tight around the head or wrapping up the head.
Yellowness all over the body. Yellow eye in jaundice and liver troubles. Eyes inflamed. Margins of lids and eyelashes crusty; fine pimples and eruptions. After leaving the head symptoms, which are relieved by warmth, we find many symptoms worse in the warm room. Pulsation in the ears. Ulceration of the edges of the nostrils. Tongue has the appearance as if it had been burnt, excoriated and cracked in various directions. Fissures burn like fire. Hunger, but knows not for what. Ravenous hunger followed by nausea. Aggravation from salt things, from eating salt food, from salt baths, from sea bathing, and at the seashore from inhaling sea air. Chest complaints, liver complaints and constipation at sea. Bromine has complaints of saliors when they come on shore. Magnesia mur. has complaints from going to sea. When a patient has urticaria at the seashore, Arsenic will cure in Arsenic cases and' will often mitigate when it is the only symptom.
Foul eructations tasting like rotten eggs. Disordered stomach. Stomach easily disordered. Waterbrash, vomiting. Like Magnesia carb., it has inability to digest milk. Milk causes pain, and it is passed undigested lienteric stools. Fainting at the dinner table in hysterical women.
It has many liver troubles. Enlargement and induration of the liver, with jaundiced skin. Right lobe of liver sore, painful while lying on it, and when he turns over to the left he is uncomfortable, as it feels as if the liver dragged over to the left. Natrum sulph. often cures that symptom, and Ptelea has a somewhat similar condition. These two symptoms, aggravation from lying on the right, that is, the soreness, and aggravation from lying on the left, that is, the dragging, come separately or together. It has much liver trouble from lying on the liver.
Tenderness in the region of the stomach and over the bowels. Attacks of gastralgia in the evening. A strong feature in this remedy is indigestion. The stomach becomes less and less able to digest and finally he cannot take a mouthful of food without distress. Abdominal dropsies. Colic, cramps, tearing pains. Great flatulence. With this kind of digestive disturbance we have a good home for tapeworm, it hatches out easily in this patient. The most troublesome patients I have are those who come after having had a tapeworm removed by violent drugs. It takes a long time to restore them. If a patient will come with his worm and all his symptoms, I will give him relief, and he will soon be turned into order and the tapeworm will cause no trouble.
Constipation of infants, as in Magnesia carb. Chalky stools like Magnesia carb. When the patient is an adult and yellow with jaundice, the stools are light colored, bileless and there is no expulsive power.
No power to expel the contents of the bladder, so he presses with the abdominal muscles on the full bladder and passes a little. Lack of sensation in the bladder, so that sometimes he cannot tell whether he has to urinate or not until the bladder is so full that it causes pressure. The inability to feel extends to the urethra, and he cannot tell in the dark whether he is passing urine or not.
Metrorrhagia, with backache which is ameliorated by pressing hard back in the chair or lying on a hard pillow. Bearing down pains in the pelvis, especially in hysterical women and girls.
Congestion of chest from sea bathing. Chest troubles and colds on the chest at the seashore and from salt baths. Palpitation of the heart, with anxiety. Anxiety and restlessness come on at rest; he must do something, must hurry. These symptoms are likely to come on again in the evening when he tries to go to sleep.
Shocks through the body, like electric shocks, when wide awake, jerking .the whole frame; twitching and jerking. Numbness in the extremities. Tearing pains in the upper limbs and marked restlessness in lower limbs. Cramps in calves at night. Paralytic drawing and tearing in all the limbs. Burning of the soles at night in bed. Foot-sweat is another symptom like Silicea. Numbness of the arms in the morning on waking.
Hysterical and spasmodic complaints. Weakness from sea bathing or salt baths. It is the aggravation from salt. Sleep unrefreshing, anxious dreams. Bodily state sensitive to cold, and great disposition to take cold. Some complaints are ameliorated by fresh air, if not too cold.
MAGNESIA PHOSPHORICA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Magnesia phos. is best known for its spasmodic conditions and neuralgias. The pains are very violent and may affect any nerve. A pain localizes itself in a nerve and becomes worse and worse, sometimes coming in paroxysms, but becoming so violent that the patient becomes frantic. The pains are ameliorated by heat and pressure. The patient feels better in a warm place; and his neuralgias are also better, he is miserable, and his pains are brought on when he becomes cold or is in a cold place. Pains are brought on from riding in the cold, and, in cold, damp weather. Exposure for a long time to cold winds causes neuralgia of the face.
The pains are felt everywhere. Pain in the bowels, enteralgias, cramps in the stomach and bowels, with the same modalities. Pains in the spinal cord under the same rule amelioration from heat. There are times when a nerve, in which there is considerable pain, becomes sensitive to pressure, becomes sore. The spinal cord becomes sore. Convulsions, with stiffness of the limbs. Convulsions in adults or children, followed by extreme sensitiveness to touch, to wind, to noise, to excitement, to everything. Snell convulsions as children have during dentition. Colic; three months colic, cramps, bilious colic. But the special feature is its power to debilitate, to cause irritation of the nerves and muscles. Cramps from prolonged exertion. Stiffness, numbness, awkwardness and deadness of a nerve from prolonged exertion. Thus it applies to long use of the hands and fingers in writing, and gives a fair sample of writer's cramp. It is especially useful in the cramps that come in the fingers, from writing, playing instruments and piano practice. Pianists suddenly break down, with stiffness of the fingers, after several hours labor every day for years. The fingers give out. In playing the harp a cramp comes on and the fingers cannot perform their use. Other parts are affected in the same way from prolonged exertion. A laborer's hand will sometimes cramp and become almost useless. As soon as he undertakes to do that particular thing his hand cramps and he clutches the implement or loses hold. The carpenter after prolonged use of a tool has a cramp. This is a strong feature of the remedy in all sorts of over-exertion.
Violent cramps in dysentery and cholera morbus, that make him scream out. Twitching of the muscles all over the body, as in cholera. It was Schuessler's main remedy for chorea, but we can only use it by its proving. Schuessler prescribed it in all nervous conditions, but its proving justifies its use in neuralgia ameliorated by heat and pressure, cramps and twitchings. Shooting pains along the nerves, but these are not so common as violent pains in paroxysms a tearing pain as if the nerve were inflamed and put on a stretch. Shaking as in paralysis agitans and complaints resembling it. Amelioration from heat and pressure, and aggravation from cold, cold bathing, cold winds, cold weather, lack of clothing. Pains all over, but more likely pain located in one part.
The mental symptoms have not been brought out to any extent. It has been used clinically when diarrhoeas have ceased suddenly and brain troubles have come on. Congestion of the brain, but this is clinical. Neuralgia and rheumatic headaches ameliorated by heat. Excruciating pains. Violent attacks of headache ameliorated by hard pressure, heat and in the (lark. I have seen this mitigation of the symptoms in chronic congestive headache, when the face was red and there was throbbing, almost like Bell.; those headaches give way to Magnesia phos., when there is relief by heat and pressure. He wants the head bandaged with a tight-fitting cloth, a warm room, and he is aggravated by cold.
Spasms and jerking about the eyes, or prolonged tonic spasms producing a strabismus. Violent supra- and infra-orbital pains with amelioration from heat and pressure. It has cured more face-aches than other pains. Neuralgia of the face, worse on the right side, and ameliorated by heat and pressure, and aggravated by cold. Tic dou-loureaux. Chronic jerkings of the face. It favors rheumatic and gouty subjects who suffer with neuralgia. It is a wonderful remedy for spasmodic hiccoughing. I have sometimes given Magnesia phos. for hiccoughing when I could not get any other symptoms to prescribe on.
Pain at the pit of the stomach. Spasms of the stomach with clean tongue. Colic ameliorated by doubling up, like Coloc., and ameliorated by heat. The colic is not so markedly relieved by heat in Coloc., but is relieved by pressure. Distension of the abdomen and flatulence, with much pain. Radiating pains in the abdomen. Compelled to walk and groan from pain. Meteorism. It is said to cure cows of this condition. Colchicum will cure cows when they are distended with gas after being turned into clover patches.
Cutting, darting pains in haemorrhoids. If well proved we would probably have many liver symptoms, because both Magnes. and Phos. have liver symptoms.
Violent pains in acute rheumatism, ameliorated by heat. Neuralgic pains in the limbs. Rest relieves many complaints, and the least motion brings them on. Pains changing place.
MANGANUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Manganum is pre-eminently a drug that causes a species of chlorosis, and it is suitable for chlorotic girls, in broken down 'constitutions, waxy, anaemic, pallid, sickly, threatening phthisis, with necrosis and caries of bone and organic affections. There is the history of a long period of scanty menstruation, or the menses have been delayed until the patient was eighteen or twenty years of age.
A strong feature is the great soreness of the periosteum, and especially of the shin bone. Tendency to ulceration and eruptions, and around these there is thickening and infiltration. Chronic eruptions; inveterate like psoriasis. Small ulcers suppurate and infiltrate with purple hardness. It has a deep action, breaks down the blood corpuscles and lays the foundation for tuberculosis, especially in the larynx. Repeated attacks, of laryngitis, each leaving the patient in a worse state than before. Tuberculosis that begins in the larynx. Aversion to food, no appetite, nothing will tempt him. This, with great soreness over the body, lays the foundation for some deep complaint. It is not an acute periostitis, but a passive soreness all over.
Inflammation of the joints and swellings go on to suppuration and necrosis. Ulcerations and suppurative processes take on a quality of semi-malignancy and do not heal, presenting an erysipelatous appearance. Everywhere there is soreness to touch and soreness from jarring. The bones are sore from walking. Arnica relieves only a day or two; but in this remedy it is deep-suited and prolonged, and we would not think of Arnica or Baptisia, which would only give relief for a day or so. Vesicular eruptions, infiltrating, deep-seated, with tendency to crack and bleed. Roughness of the skin and psoriasis Complaints worse in cold, damp weather and before a storm.
And now we will take up some of the mental symptoms. There are only a few of them, but they are striking, and these go deeper into the nature of the man himself, even than those we have been speaking about. Anxiety and fear. Great apprehensiveness. Something awful is going to happen. Restless and anxious. He walks the floor, and the more he walks the floor the more anxious he becomes. He attempts mental occupation; tries to occupy his mind, and the more he does this, the more anxious he becomes. He is tired and careworn. He cannot think; he cannot meditate. He has difficulties in his business because he cannot do good thinking. Anxious restlessness.
The queerest part of all is just how he gets relief. He lies down and it all passes away. You cannot find that in every medicine; that is rare, strange and peculiar. And yet, see how general it is; it defines the whole nature of the sick man. His very life is excited, tired and anxious. Great sadness and distress. He lies down and says, "Why did I not think of that before?" Perfectly comfortable now. He gets up, and the anxiety and restlessness come over him again, and he is fairly driven to distraction. See how unlike Rhus that gets relief from motion. See how unlike Ars. that is, the patient goes from one bed to another from bed to chair and back again; he cannot sit still, or lie still, for his anxiety is worse keeping still. See how striking these symptoms are, and see what a contrast we have. The very innermost life of the patient is talking to us and asking for remedies. We must now read the signs and inner expressions of the disordered economy.
Then, he has these tormenting fears. Anxiety in the day time while moving- about, better while living down. Sad, weeping and silent. Can think of nothing to console him but to lie down and get peace. Is it any wonder, then, that some of these patients are driven to a bedridden state? And Manganum is a wonderful remedy for bedridden women Who love to keep still, and it is said of them that they love to lie in bed.
As far as we have gone we see that everything brings out that very idea and the nature of things that Hahnemann talks about in his first paragraph, that the sole duty of the physician is to pay his attention to the sick, to the patient himself; and who is this patient himself? This is what we have been talking about, this is what we have been trying to bring out here; and all the particulars that I shall take up corroborate these very things. These particulars are so linked with these generals talked about that they make a grand unity of thought, and we cannot separate them.
Irritability and low-spirited, like Sulph. and Graph. It is similar to Arg. met., Phos., Graph. and Sulph., in its underlying tendency to tuberculosis. Fretfulness from small things.
Headaches as in anaemia. Dreadful headaches; head feels heavy; sticking pains; pressing, boring pains. Stitches like needles. Aggravation from jarring on stepping. Soreness in the brain and skull. Skull sensitive to touch and pressure. Red, sore spots here and there on the scalp (like Phos.), as if erysipelas would develop. Drawing, stinging headache in the open air, ameliorated in the house. Other headaches are ameliorated in the air. Aggravation from a jar, motion, and change of temperature and in cold, damp weather.
Agglutination of the eyelids. It is a suppurative and catarrhal remedy. The eyelids are swollen. Aching of the eyes on looking at near objects, especially a near light. I have used this medicine often with that symptom and cured when there was pain in the eyes from sewing, reading fine print and doing anything that would concentrate vision. Ruta in nervous, gouty constitutions, when there is pain in the eyes and complaints from sewing and reading fine print for a long time. Ruta is especially a remedy for artists who work with a magnifying glass.
Offensive discharges from the ear. Dullness of hearing ameliorated by blowing the nose. Stopped sensation ameliorated by blowing the nose. Catarrh of the Eustachian tube. The external ear is painful to touch.
The ear symptoms are numerous. It seems to many patients that all their troubles settle in the ears. All the pains and aches in the upper part of the body settle in the ears. The pains in the throat shoot to the ears. There-are pains in the throat, and pains in the teeth that go to the ears. Pains in the eyes that center in the ears. That is strange. The ear is a center of much tribulation. "Catarrhal conditions, with increasing deafness." From cold, damp weather. He is deaf whenever the cold rains come in the fall. Then there is a soreness, rawness and burning in the auditory canal, with much itching.
Silica and Kali carb. are the two principal remedies for the paroxysmal cough that comes on from scratching the auditory canal. I have seen them choke and gag and vomit when they needed Kali carb. after scratching the auditory canal. Spasmodic cough from scratching the auditory canal belongs principally to Silica and Kali carb., but Manganum has cured it. Itching in the ears from talking, from swallowing, from laughing, or doing anything that brings the throat into operation. From talking, which is using the larynx. When the bolus passes down behind the larynx is when it takes place. It is sometimes present in laryngeal phthisis, in chronic ulceration of the larynx, with burning, stinging pains in the larynx that shoot to the ears. In the proving of Manganum it is astonishing how many ear symptoms are recorded. And all these ear symptoms, like the others, are brought on, or increased, in cold, damp weather. "Catarrh of the Eustachian tube." Obstruction. Feels as if the ears were obstructed. "Feels as if there were a leaf before the ear." In cold, rainy weather.
A strong feature running through the remedy is similar to Dulc., in that it is worse from cold, cold air, and cold, damp weather. His catarrh rouses up in cold weather. Every cold, damp spell causes hoarseness and the formation of mucus in the throat. All of its complaints respond to the weather.
Wherever there is irritation there is great soreness. The eyes are red and sore. The throat is red and raw. Ear discharges are followed by great tenderness. Soreness and tenderness run all through. Chronic catarrh. Nose stopped up. Discharge yellow, lumpy and green in the morning. Bloody discharge. The nose and cartilages are sore. He avoids handling the nose.
No medicine will give you a sicklier face. When persons have bled out and have become waxy and pale the routinist thinks of China, but when there has been no bleeding and this same state is present from breaking down of the blood corpuscles Manganum is to be thought of. Chlorosis and pernicious anaemia would make one think of Manganum, and also picric acid and Ferrum. Small wounds suppurate; every bruise remains sore for a long time. There is not much bleeding, for there is not much blood.
Infiltration is in keeping with this remedy. I have seen it cure inveterate ulcers, indurated and purple, in anaemic patients. Old "fever sores" can be cured with this remedy. Squamous eruptions.
All sorts of stomach disorders. Indigestion. Want of appetite. Drawing in the region of the stomach. Colic. Ally of these are worse from cold damp weather. The pains are ameliorated from bending double. It is a very useful remedy for warding off tabes mesenterica, anaemic constitution, no appetite, diarrhoea, pain in the bowels, and, as the patient emaciates, the glands are felt. Useful in women who have been anaemic for some time from loss of blood, but it is not so great a remedy for anaemia following haemorrhages as for that condition resulting from destruction of the blood corpuscles. Dreadful flushes of heat like Psor., Lach., Sulph. and Graph., coming on in women who have been anaemic for some time.
It is also a great liver remedy. There is congestion and tumefaction of the liver. It has cured a tendency to fatty degeneration. It has cured jaundice; it has cured many cases of gall stone; which means that the liver goes into such a sluggish state that the bile is unhealthy, the flow is impeded, and then little nodules form in it, and form gall stones. It establishes a better working order of the stomach a better working basis of the liver, the bile becomes healthy, and gall stones are dissolved in healthy bile. Gall stone colics are likely to occur along with gall stones.
The abdomen may be said to be full of rumblings, and there are frequent griping pains and these come on in cold, damp weather. They come on from eating cold food, like iced foods. Cold things create much distress in the region of the liver. Distress in the stomach, and distress through the bowels. "Pain and contraction at the navel;" something like Plumbum, although it is not said to draw like a string at the navel, like Plumbum and Platinum.
"Passes much flatus with the stool. Irregular action of the bowels." There may be periods of constipation, interrupted with every indigestion, causing diarrhoea so that the bowels are always irregular. He is never quite safe, he has constipation or diarrhoea. As we might suppose, the stomach is the faulty organ.
"Cramps in the anus while sitting. Better lying down." It is a useful remedy for those flashes of heat that occur at the climacteric period. The chlorotic state mentioned is closely related to the menstrual state. Disorders of the uterus, and of the stomach.
Very scanty menstrual flow. It lasts but a day or two, and it comes too soon. This is unusual in anaemic conditions, unusual in chlorosis. In women past the turn of life, every little while there will come a little haemorrhage, a little watery flow. Anaemic old ladies, with a little watery flow from the uterus. We have had in the past to rely mostly on Calcarea for the old ladies with haemorrhages of the uterus.
We are not surprised with all these weaknesses if we have muscular relaxation, and it is true in Manganum with these tired, weakly, anaemic women; and also there is prolapsus of the uterus and prolapsus of the rectum. A dragging down of the intestines, and the whole abdomen feels heavy from a state of relaxation.
The region most threatened is the larynx, trachea and lungs. If this anaemic girl does not improve and get up a better reaction something serious will happen. Menstruation is merely a pale fluid or a little leucorrhoea. Rawness of the larynx. Hoarseness and loss of voice in .a chronic state. It is suitable in recurrent cases coming with every spell of damp weather until finally tuberculosis starts. Every cold starts up additional trouble in the larynx, causing a laryngitis. It is a wonderful remedy in speakers and singers, as useful as Argentum wet. Constant accumulation of mucus, more forms as soon as he clears it. Hemming all the time and annoying everybody. Arg. met., Sil., Sulph., Phos. and Manganum all do that. Each hem brings up a mouthful of mucus. Tubercular laryngitis. Rawness in the larynx. Expectoration of green mucus, great anaemia. Every spell of cold rouses up a bronchitis, like Dulc. Cold, dry weather sometimes relieves, but the patient is sensitive to cold; he is chilly and anemic.
The cough is ameliorated by lying down. Most coughs are worse from lying down, and few remedies have amelioration from lying. In Euphrasia there is a cough coming from coryza, especially acute coryza in vigorous persons, and the cough is better while lying. Again there is a nervous spinal cough in spinal subjects, nervous girls, who have a cough as soon as they lie down, which is cured by Hyos. This remedy has a day cough no cough at night because he is lying. Arg. met. has a day cough; like Manganum it refers to the larynx, and is ameliorated by lying down. Cough worse from talking, laughing, walking, deep inspiration and cold, damp weather.
This remedy is most useful in recurrent complaints, and is hardly ever seen in first attacks. It is of great use in patients who are gradually declining. Ulceration and bleeding in the lungs. The haemorrhage is watery, like bloody saliva or bloody mucus. The patient grows nervous, tremulous and has palpitation.
The limbs are full of distress, even to gout. Sore bones, burning in soles, arthritic enlargements, painful periosteum, sore joints. It has not rapid inflammatory rheumatism, like Puls. and Bell., but tenderness of the joints, with not much swelling and aggravation from damp Weather, like Rhod., Rhus and Dulc.
This remedy does not usually come up in fevers, but in cases of low typhoid, after the fever has somewhat abated, the bones are sensitive, sore all over, the -patient does not rally, there is prolonged convalescence, especially in badly treated cases, who have been drugged until the -blood corpuscles are ruined. You would think if he could only start up a big abscess he would be better, but he has not vigor enough for that. Some of these patients have "fever sores," and this acts as a seton and relieves them; but this patient cannot develop one, only the periosteum is sore and infiltrated.
MERCURIUS
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
The pathogenesis of Mercury is found in the provings of Merc. viv. and Merc. sol., two slightly different preparations, but not different enough to make any distinction in practice.
Mercury is used in testing the temperature, and a Merc. constitution is just as changeable and sensitive to heat and cold. The patient is worse from the extremes of temperature, worse from both heat and cold. Both the symptoms and the patient are worse in a warm atmosphere, worse in the open air, and worse in the cold. The complaints of Mercury when sufficiently acute to send him to bed are worse from the warmth of the bed, so that he is forced to uncover; but after he uncovers and cools off he gets worse again, so that he has difficulty in keeping comfortable. This applies to the pains, the fever, ulcers and eruptions and the patient himself.
He is an offensive patient. We speak of mercurial odors. The breath especially is very foetid, and it can lie detected on entering the room; it permeates the whole room. The perspiration is offensive; it has a strong, sweetish, penetrating odor. Offensiveness runs all through; offensive urine, stool and sweat; the odors from the nose and mouth are offensive. When Merc. is used in large doses and the patient is salivated he gives off these odors. One who has once smelt a salivated patient will remember the mercurial odor. I remember when I was a student, almost every room had the mercurial odor. Mercury was given till the, gums were touched and salivation was produced. That odor is often an index to the use of Merc.
He is worse at night. The bone pains, joint affections and inflammatory conditions are all worse at night and somewhat relieved during the day. Bone pains are universal, but especially where the flesh is thin over the . bones. Periosteal pains, boring pains, worse at night and from warmth of the bed.
The glands are inflamed, and swollen; the parotids, sublinguals, lymphatic glands of the neck, groin and axilla are all affected; the mammae swell and there is inflammation and swelling of the liver. It is pre-eminently a glandular remedy. Induration is also a general; inflamed parts indurate. If the skin is inflamed it is hard. Inflamed glands are hard. There is induration with ulceration.
A tendency to ulcerate runs through the remedy. Ulcers are found everywhere, in the throat, nose, mouth, and on the lower limbs. Ulcers sling and burn and have a lardaceous base, an ashy-white appearance looking as if spread over with a coating of lard. It looks like a diphtheritic exudate, and Merc. has diphtheritic exudations on inflamed surfaces. Ulcers in the throat have this appearance. The mucous membrane sometimes inflames without ulceration, but with exudation, and hence it is useful in diphtheria. It has the same condition in ulcers; when the system is run down they exude a grey lardy or ashy deposit. Chancres take on that form, a whitish cheesy deposit on the base. When you realize that the complaints of Merc. are worse at night, and think of the bone pains, periosteal inflammations, etc., it is not surprising that Merc. sometimes cures syphilis. It is wonderful that the allopath hit upon it for this disease, and he cures or suppresses enough cases by similarity to justify its continued use. When given suitably it cures.
Another marked feature is the tendency to the formation of pus. With inflammation there is burning and stinging and the rapid formation of pus and the part is aggravated by both warmth and cold. Abscesses burn and sting; inflammation of joints is attended with pusformation; in inflammation of the pleura the cavity fills up with pus. The discharges of pus are yellow-green. The Merc. gonorrhoeal discharge is thick greenish yellow, with stinging and burning in the urethra.
Rheumatic inflammation of joints and catarrhal inflammation of mucous membrane are features running through the remedy, and these are attended with sweat, and an astonishing feature is that the sweat does not relieve, and there is even an aggravation while sweating. Rheumatism in old syphilitic, gonorrhoeal and gouty patients. It is similar enough to relate to some cases of psora, syphilis and sycosis. It partakes of the nature of all three miasms.
After a prover has taken Merc. a long time he emaciates. This is seen in old mercury takers and in syphilitics who have been mercurialized. It is a great remedy in this condition steady emaciation with trembling, worse at night and from the warmth of the bed, great restlessness, can't find peace in any position. These miserable wretches, who are breaking down, are great sufferers, whether psoric, syphilitic or sycotic.
A strange feature is repeated swelling and abscess formation with: out any heat. An abscess or swelling in a joint forms, and he sweats from head to foot, is worse at night, loses flesh, trembles and is weak, but there is no heat while the abscess goes on. Abscesses form when the life force is so low that there is no tendency to repair; a slow and prolonged pus formation, no irritability in the abscess, no tendency to granulate, it opens and keeps on discharging and seems dead. Merc. will warm it up, stop the sweat and favor granulation.
The superficial ulceration is inclined to spread and become phagedenic; it is not deep but grows larger. These open ulcers are especially seen in old syphilitics; lardaceous base; not much irritability, they are even numb, and if pus is discharged it is greenish-yellow; false granulations appear. Mere. car. is a greater remedy for the superficial, eating, phagedenic ulcer. At times Merc. takes on a gangrenous condition. This may be seen anywhere, but especially on the lips, cheeks and gums. Cancrum oris. Gangrenous chancre, foetid and black; a sphacelus forms in the chancre and the part sloughs off. All these conditions are aggravated by heat. A patient with a typical Merc. abscess rebels at times against the poultice, for it makes the trouble worse.
Trembling runs through the remedy, quivering all over. It has been used with benefit in paralysis agitans. Tremor of the hands so that he cannot lift anything or eat or write. Merc. is a great remedy in children with epileptiform fits, twitching and disorderly motions. It will help children to grow out of these incoordinate angular movements of the hands and feet. Jerking, twitching and trembling. The motions of the tongue are disorderly and the child cannot talk. Convulsions. Involuntary motions which can be momentarily controlled by volition. The restlessness is extreme.
The trembling, weakness, sweat, foetor, suppuration, and ulceration, the aggravation at night and front heat and cold, give the earlier impressions of the remedy.
The mental symptoms, which still more deeply show the nature of the medicine, are rich. A marked feature running all through is hastiness; a hurried, restless, anxious, impulsive disposition. Coming in spells, in cold cloudy weather, or damp weather, the mind will not work, it is slow and sluggish and he is forgetful. This is noticed in persons who are tending toward imbecility. He cannot answer questions right off, looks and thinks, and finally grasps it. Imbecility and softening of the brain are strong features. He becomes foolish. Delirium in acute complaints. From his feelings he thinks he must be losing his reason. Desire to kill persons contradicting her. Impulse to kill or commit suicide; sudden anger with, impulse to do violence. She has the impulse to commit suicide or violent things, and she is fearful that she will lose her reason and carry the impulses out. Impulsive insanity, then, is a feature, but imbecility is more common than insanity. These impulses are leading features. The patient will not tell you about his impulses, but they relate to deep evils of the will, they fairly drive him to do something. Given a Merc. patient, and he has impulses that he tries to control, no matter what, Merc. will do something for him. During menses, great anxiety, great sadness. Anxious and restless as if some evil impended, worse at night, with sweat.
All these symptoms are common in old syphilitics, broken down after mercurial treatment and sulphur baths at the springs, with their bone pains, glandular troubles, sweating, catarrhs and ulcerations everywhere.
Merc. is suitable to rheumatic troubles of the scalp, and neuralgias and brain trouble when there are burning, stinging pains and pains affected by the weather, and when there are head troubles that have come on from suppressed discharges, such as suppressed otorrhoea after scarlet fever, or when there are head troubles in scarlet fever. Think of Merc. if you are called to a child with sweating of the head, dilated pupils, rolling of the head, and aggravation at night, who has had scarlet fever or a suppressed ear discharge. Merc. cures lingering febrile conditions analogous to the typhoid state, but caused by suppressed ear discharge. I have cured cases that were due to packing the ear with borax, iodoform, etc., the patient having first a remittent and later a continued fever. This would go on for five or six weeks and be relieved only when the discharge returned after a dose of Merc. I remember a case of this type. It was called cerebro-spinal meningitis; the head was drawn back and twisted and held to one side. It began as an otitis media with discharge which was suppressed. Two or three doctors were called and could do nothing. In the night I went to the bedside and got the history and symptoms of Merc. Merc. re-established the discharge in twenty-four hours, the torticollis passed away, the fever subsided and the child made an excellent recovery. I can recall many such cases.
There is a tension about the scalp as if it were bandaged. Nervous girls have headache over the nose and around the eyes as if tied with a tape, or as if a tight hat were pressing on the head. Pressing, tearing pain in the eyes. Burning pains in the temples ameliorated by sitting up and moving about, worse at night. Periosteal pains worse in cold, damp weather, in rheumatic and gouty constitutions, with sensitiveness in the eyes and ears, sore throat and glandular swellings. Headaches in old mercurialized syphilitics; they become barometers; sensitive to the weather. The catarrhal headaches are very troublesome; headache in those suffering from chronic catarrh with thick discharge. The thick discharge becomes watery and the pain in the forehead, face and ears very distressing. These headaches are violent. Chronic rheumatic headache from the suppression of a discharge from any part, or from foot sweat suppressed; alternation of foot sweat and headache. When the foot sweat is gone he has pain and stiffness in the joints. Silicea has that also. Sil. and Merc. do not follow each other well, when well selected; but if crude Mercury has been taken for a' long time, Silicea, like Nitric acid, is a good remedy to eliminate it when the symptoms agree.
With all headaches there is much heat in the head. Bursting headaches, fullness of the brain, and constriction like a band. Vise-like pressure. He is sensitive to the air when he has headache. This is true of Merc. all through. He is relieved in the room, but worse in a warm or cold room, and violently worse from a draught. He wants to be covered but is worse from heat. The hoop-like sensation is worse at night.
Merc. is a wonderful remedy to ward off acute hydrocephalus after measles and scarlatina; the child rolls the head and moans, and the head sweats. It is closely related to Apis, which is also a great remedy after scarlet fever to ward off or cure hydrocephalus.
Exostoses in old syphilitics. Lacerating, tearing pains in the pericranium. The whole external head is painful to touch. The scalp is tense and sore. Foetid, oily sweat on the head. Children have moist eczema, an excoriating, offensive eruption.
Merc. is a wonderful eye remedy, especially for "colds." Every cold settles in the eye in gouty and rheumatic patients. Catarrh of the eyes worse from looking into the fire or rather from sitting close to the fire; the radiated heat causes smarting. Eyelids forcibly drawn together as if long deprived of sleep. Fog or mist before the eyes. Merc. cures iritis in syphilitics. The rule now-a-days is to use a mydriatic in iritis to prevent adhesions. I have treated many cases and I have no desire to dilate the pupil. I believe it is unnecessary. The homoeopathic remedy will stop the iritis speedily so that no adhesions will form, and if they have begun the remedy will remove them. Pains tearing and burning around the eyes, in temples, etc. Tension of the scalp as if it were a tight fitting cap, or tension as from a tape. Ulceration and inflammation of the cornea. Vascular appearance of the cornea; inflammation, especially confined to the cornea, sometimes pustular, sometimes diffused. There is copious lachrymation with all eye symptoms, and the tears excoriate, causing a red line down the cheeks. Greenish yellow, or a green discharge. Lids spasmodically closed. Great photophobia. In inflammatory conditions of all the tissues of the eye lids, conjunctiva and deeper structures. Colds settle in the eye like Dulc.
Sometimes you will see a little fine growth on the iris, growing across the pupil and attached by a pedicle. It is really a syphilitic condyloma. Merc. cures it in a few days. Inflammation of the retina and choroid and of the optic nerve. All sorts of disturbed vision. It is useful in purulent ophthalmia, with swollen lids. Two kinds of constitution need it, the syphilitic and the rheumatic or gouty. He cannot open the eyes; they are spasmodically closed, and there is great tumefaction.
Ear troubles. Horribly stinking greenish discharge. Green, thick, acrid pus from the ears like the discharge from the nose and other parts. Stinking otorrhoea. In otitis media with ruptured drum, Were. is a frequently required remedy. In Spring after a long, cold Winter, the cold, damp weather causes many cases of otorrhoea; it is almost endemic in large cities. The ear drum heals like any other place if the patient is put in good condition by the remedy. If not well treated a hole will be left. Ears inflamed, with cramp-like pains. Mere. has stinging pain like Apis. All routinists will give Apis for stinging pains, and yet it often is Merc. that the patient needs. Purulent, offensive otorrhoea. Enlargement of the parotid and cervical glands with all inflammations of the ears. Parotids sore and enlarged, neck stiff, and head sometimes drawn back. Furuncles in external canal. Fungous excrescences and polypi.
The nose troubles would take a long time to describe. Old syphilitics, with nasal bones affected, thick, greenish, yellow, acrid, stinking discharge. Nosebleed and bloody discharge from the nose. Coryza acrid, watery, with pressure through the bones of the face, worse from heat or cold, worse at night; sensitive to every draught; must get up and walk the floor. It has coryza with much sneezing with an opposite state, ameliorated lying, not at all during the night while lying in bed, only in the daytime while up and about. The inhalation of hot air feels good to the nose, but the heat aggravates the body. Incessant sneezing. Bleeding, scurfy, red nostrils. Old catarrhal smell in the nose. Rawness, burning and swelling. Inside of the nostrils smarting and burning. Aching, tearing and pressure in the bones. Bones of the face painful, feel as if pressed outward, and he wants to press, but it is painful.
Merc. is not deep enough to cure the whole constitution in psoric cases that are constantly taking cold. It cures the cold at once, but implants its own nature and the patient catches cold oftener. It should not be given often, not oftener than twice in a winter. Kali iod. is better for the same burning in the face, running coryza, and aggravation from heat and warmth of the bed, and it will cure the coryza in a night when apparently Merc. is indicated. It is also an antidote to Merc. Don't give many doses of Merc. in psoric cases; look for a deeper medicine.
It has syphilitic eruptions and neuralgias of the face with or without catarrh. It is a great medicine for mumps; it is a routine remedy for this condition, which shows that it must be frequently indicated. It cures where the symptoms agree.
Scorbutic gums in those who have been salivated. Rigg's disease; purulent discharge from around the teeth. Toothache; every tooth aches, especially in old gouty and mercurialized patients. Looseness of the teeth. Red, soft gums. Teeth black and dirty. Black teeth and early decay of the teeth in syphilitic children, like Staph. Copious salivation. Gums painful to touch. Pulsation in the gums and roots. Gums have a blue red margin, or purple color, and are spongy and bleed easily. Gums settle away, and the teeth feel long, and are elongated. Teeth sore and painful so that he cannot masticate. Abscesses of the gums and roots of the teeth.
The taste, tongue and mouth furnish important and distinctive symptoms. As the tongue is projected it is seen to be flabby, has a mealy surface, and is often pale. The imprint of the teeth is observed all round the edge of the tongue. The tongue is swollen as if spongy, and presses in around the teeth and thus gets the imprint of the teeth. Inflammation, ulceration and swelling of the tongue are strong features. Old gouty constitutions have swollen tongue; the tongue will swell in the night and he will waken up with a mouthful. The taste is perverted, nothing tastes right. The tongue is coated yellow or white as chalk in a layer. Offensive mouth; putrid odors from the mouth especially the mercurial odor of the salivated patient. The tongue becomes clumsy; difficulty in talking; his speech is hardly intelligible. Awkwardness of the tongue as in persons intoxicated. Ulcers flat; eating ulcers; holes are eaten through the check. Eating away of the soft palate and the bone of the hard palate is often eaten away. Purulent formation in the antrum of Highmore and fistul from the mouth to the antrum. Fluoric acid and Silicea are more frequently indicated in these fistul, especially if the bone is involved. Copious flow of foetid saliva. Sore mouth of children and nursing mothers; little aphthous patches with the mercurial odor and flabby, spongy appearance of the mucous membrane and tongue. General diffused inflammation of the mouth. The whole mucous membrane is sensitive and painful, burning, stinging and smarting; dryness with or without aphthous patches. Thrush of children. Scorbutic gums.
Sore throat. It is a remedy for inflammation of the throat, with spongy appearance, general diffused tumefaction, swelling of the parotids, fullness and stiffness of the neck. Lardaceous base in ulcers; flat ulcers, spreading ulcers. Great dryness in the throat. The swelling impairs the motion of all the muscles that take part in swallowing. Swallowing is attended with difficulty, pain and paralytic weakness, and the effort to swallow forces the bolus up into the nose, and liquids come out through the nostrils. The mercurial odor is a strong feature, but Merc. often cures when that odor is not perceptible; it has .such an affinity for the throat. It has chronic throat troubles and syphilitic ulcers and patches. The inflammation extends upwards and downwards, red and pale patches, the red looking as if they would suppurate or ulcerate. The red spots become quite purple, but the more purple they are the more they are like Lach. Tonsils dark red with stinging pains. Quinsy, after pus has formed. It is useful in diphtheria, and most cases are diffused, extensive patches or patches here and there, with spongy appearance, but no ulceration. Tumefaction; and the exudations are upon a tumefied base. Stiff neck. Erysipelatous inflammation of the throat. Dark, sloughing, eating, corroding ulcers in the throat. He has aversion to meat, wine, brandy, coffee, greasy food, butter.
Milk disagrees, and conies up sour. Sweets disagree. He is turned against his beer. The stomach is chronically disordered; eructations, regurgitations, heartburn, etc. Sour stomach; it is foul. He has nausea with vomiting and regurgitation of food. In such a stomach food is like a load. Bad taste; bitter mouth; he tastes the food; it comes up sour. With all this the saliva constantly runs from the mouth. It does not improve as digestion goes on. The half-digested substances are vomited. It is like the state in persons who have destroyed their stomach from crossing liquors, beer, wine and whisky.
The liver furnishes much trouble. Our forefathers for years took blue mass every Spring to regulate the liver. They physicked themselves with it and tapped their liver every Spring with it, and as a result they had worse livers than they would have had if the doctors had stayed at home. Constipation, bilious habits and disordered stomach. The fullness in the region of the stomach, coming in spells, worse in cold, damp weather and warm, damp weather, worse in the Spring, jaundiced condition, disordered stomach, the aggravation at night and from the warmth of the bed, nightly feverishness and foul mouth, will give you the Merc. state. Stitches in the liver. Liver symptoms worse lying on the right side. Many complaints of Merc. are aggravated by lying on the right side. The lung symptoms and cough, liver, stomach and bowel symptoms are all worse while lying on the right side.
In the abdomen we find colic, rumbling, distension, aches and pains, stinging and burning. It has a great variety of stools, of diarrhoea and constipation. It has a well-defined dysenteric condition. Slimy, bloody stools with much straining, he feels as if he could never finish, even when no more is passing, a "never-get-done" feeling. This is the very opposite of Nux and Rhus in dysentery. These are relieved if a little stool is passed, but Merc. and Sulph. will sit and strain, and all the salts of Merc. have the same state. Merc. cor. has a more violent attack, with violent urging to stool and to urinate, and intense suffering, with burning in the parts and the passage of pure blood.
Merc., Ipec. and Aeon. are frequently indicated in epidemic dysentery that comes in hot weather, and Ipec., Dulc. and Merc. are frequently indicated in the dysentery of cold weather. You should go to the bedside of a case of dysentery with the repertory or go home and send medicine. Your first prescription should cure in epidemic dysentery, and if you work cautiously you will cure every case. It is a very simple condition to cure, but a very bad thing to get mixed up. Do not give Arsenic just because it conforms to the dysenteric condition, for if it does not cure it will mix up the case. Hesitate about giving Ars. in dysentery until you are perfectly sure it is indicated. A few days ago I saw a patient who could not lie down because of pain in both hypochondria; he had incessant vomiting, inflammatory rheumatism of the ankles, hands, arms and shoulders, he had purpuric spots on the arms and legs, he had inflammation of the stomach, and was a perfect museum of diseases. He had had Phos. and Ars. and many remedies very high, all supposed to be well selected, but Cadmium sulph. put him to sleep in fifteen minutes. The point was that he wanted to keep perfectly still, and hence it was unlike Ars., although all the other symptoms were like Ars. That is a strong feature of Cadmium. sulph.; he wants to keep as still as Colch. and Bry. For many years I have used it for such cases. I saw another case of cancer with coffee-ground vomit, and Cadmium sulph. stopped her vomiting, and she ate quite well until she died six weeks later. The doctor in charge had given her Ars. and Phos. and Morphine till she could take no more.
The urine burns and smarts. Frequent urging to urinate, dribbling a little; bloody urine, great burning. Haemorrhage from the urethra. Itching worse from the presence of urine. Gonorrhoea which has existed for some time; discharge thick, greenish-yellow, and offensive. Smarting and burning in the urethra when urinating. Loss of sexual power. Lascivious excitement with painful erections. Ulcers on the prepuce and glans, making it suitable in chancre and chancroid. Flat ulcers; ulcers with lardaceous base. Inflammation of the inner surface of the prepuce. Balanitis, offensive pus. In chronic balanitis when pus forms behind the glans and under the foreskin, gonorrhoeal or psoric, consult Jacaranda caroba.
The woman has much tribulation. Burning, stinging in ovaries. Screaming from pain. Stinging, tearing, cutting pains in the ovaries; patient covered with sweat Copious, excoriating leucorrhoea, parts raw, sore, inflamed and itching. Stinging, itching and boring pains in the uterus. Pains in the uterus and ovaries at the menstrual period. Milk in the breast of the non-pregnant woman at the menstrual period. Milk in the breasts instead of the menstrual flow. I once had a freak in a sixteen-year-old boy, who had milk in his breasts. I cured him with Merc.
Menstrual flow light red, pale, acrid, clotted, and profuse or scanty. The menses are sometimes suppressed. Women who have been in the habit of taking mercury for biliousness remain sterile. (Coffee drinkers often remain sterile also and you must stop their coffee.) Amenorrhoea with ebullitions. Chancres on the female genitals. Aged women have denuded genitals, rawness, soreness and false granulations, which are always bleeding. Burning, throbbing and itching in the vagina. Itching of the genitals from the contact of the urine; it must be washed off. In children, boys or girls, the urine burns after urinating and they are always carrying the hands to the genitals. Little girls have acrid leucorrhoea causing burning and itching and much trouble. Phlegmonous inflammation of the genitals. Boils and abscesses at the menstrual period ; little elongated abscesses along the margin of the mucous membrane and skin, painful, aggravated by walking, forming during the flow and breaking after the period. This, with itching, causes great suffering.
Morning sickness. A woman, while pregnant, has oedematous swelling of the genitals. Diffused inflammation, soreness and fullness of the genitals and pelvis, causing difficulty in walking, and she must take to bed. In pelvic cellulitis in the early months of pregnancy Merc. is an important remedy. Repeated miscarriages from sheer weakness. Merc. is a wonderful strengthener when properly used. Prolonged lochia. Milk scanty and spoiled.
Merc. is one of the best palliatives in cancer of the uterus and mammae. It will restrain and sometimes cure epithelioma. I knew one case cured by the Proto-iodide, an ulcerated, indurated lump in the breast, as large as a goose egg, with knots in the axilla, blueness of the part, and no hope. The tooth attenuation, given as often as the pains were very severe, took it away and she remained well.
The effect observed on the nose is not all of the Merc. coryza. Most Merc. cases begin in the nose and travel down the throat, creating rawness and scraping of the larynx, and rawness and soreness in the chest; laryngitis, tracheitis and bronchitis. Loss of voice, complete aphonia. The course of the Merc. cold is downwards, even going on to pneumonia, with sweat, restlessness and aggravation from the warmth of the bed. Of course many of the colds remain in the nose.
There are various conditions in the chest. Coughs; colds that remain in the chest, lack of reaction and tardy recovery. The colds finally settle in the bronchial tubes; the chest feels as if it would burst and the cough is worse lying on the right side. I Iook back over many cases of patients who took cold from exposure and now look sickly and sallow, with a dreadful cough and rattling on the chest; every change of the weather gives them a new cold, and they cannot lie on the right side; their tendency is to go into mucous phthisis or quick consumption. The cough is worse in the night air. There are many pains in the chest. He has a rheumatic constitution, is always sweating, worse while sweating and from the extremes of heat and cold. Stitching, stabbing, rheumatic pains in the chest with night sweats. Bloody, thick green expectoration. Suppuration of the lung, great quantities of pus form. Tremendous orgasms, bubbling and flushes of heat in the chest. With many complaints there is sore throat and rheumatism and stiffness of the neck; stiff neck with swollen glands and goitre. Stiff neck with every cold; stiffness of the side and back of the neck, Induration and soreness of the cervical glands along with other complaints.
Merc. especially affects the joints; inflammatory rheumatism with much swelling, aggravated from the heat of the bed and from uncovering. It is difficult to get just the right weight of clothing. Rheumatic affection with sweat, aggravation at night, from the warmth of the bed and while sweating, with sickly countenance. It especially attacks the upper limbs, but is also found in the lower.
Tremulous condition of the extremities, like paralysis agitans. Trembling of the hands with great weakness. Paralysis of the lower limbs, and twitching, jerking and quivering of the paralyzed parts. Arg. n., Phos., Strain., Secale and Merc. have twitching of the muscles of the paralyzed limb.
Soreness between the thighs and genitals. Ulcers on the legs; abscesses. Oedematous swelling of the feet. Cold perspiration. Copious sweat during sleep. Pain and sweat come on when comfortable in bed; bone pains. He covers up because he feels cold, but when he becomes warm the pains are aggravated.
Merc. is full of fever. Very seldom, however, has it a true, idiopathic, continued fever. It stands very low for continued fever alone, but it is especially indicated in surgical fevers, at first remittent, but later continued, such as come on from the suppression of discharges. The Merc. patient about to go into a chill is chilly even when the chill has not yet come on; sensitive to the moving air in a warm room; violently sensitive to a draught. Cold hands and feet. The sweat is profuse and offensive. The complaints in general are worse while he sweats, and the more he sweats the worse he is. He sweats copiously and his greatest sufferings are in the sweat. Merc. does not have a clear intermittent. Between the paroxysms he has liver disturbances, diarrhoea, fever. In surgical fevers, bilious fevers, worm fever in children, and remittent fevers there is much aching in the bones, great sensitiveness to the air, aggravation at night in bed when the fever runs highest, mercurial breath and sallow skin. The fever does not go so high and the skin is not so hot as in Bell. The loaded tongue and the bilious fevers fade out after Merc. It is useful in hectic fever in the last stages of consumption, and in exhausting diseases with hectics, and in cancer when there is the aching, foul sweat, etc.
It acts wonderfully in catarrhal fever, grippe, etc., and when colds extend to the chest and there are the copious discharges everywhere. It is suitable in quasi-typhoids that have come out of remittents, symp tomatic typhoids, when the patient is icteric, low, prostrated, tremulous, with quivering muscles, great exhaustion and continued fever.
There are many skin symptoms; scurfy eruptions, vesicular eruptions, eruptions discharging pus. Vesicles burn and smart, with excoriating discharges, especially on the head. Much itching of the skin, violent, in all parts of the body, as from fleas, especially when warm in bed at night. Copper-colored eruptions as in syphilis, and mucous patches. The scurfy eruptions are especially marked. Ulcers on parts where the skin and flesh are thin over the bones. Offensive forms of eczema. Most eruptions are moist with copious oozing. It cures shingles. The skin is sallow. Excoriating wherever two parts come together. Rawness between the thighs and between the scrotum and thighs. Eruptions in such places. It has fissures at commissures, at the corners of the mouth and eyes; rawness and bleeding of the perinaeum rendering walking difficult.
This furnishes a basis for the Salts of Mercury.
THE SALTS OF MERCURY.
After studying Merc., corrosive mercury, the proto-iodide and the bin-iodide, we may from some specific symptoms in the case say that we prefer one of the salts of Mercury. When we go to rheumatic and gouty cases with the aggravation from sweat, aggravation from the warmth of the bed, the mercurial odor, etc., we can commonly say that one of the Mercurius will cure this case.
MERCURIUS CORROSIVUS.
Merc. cor. has more excoriation and burning, more activity and excitement. Merc. is slower and more sluggish. Merc. cor. is violent and active in its movements, it takes hold and runs its course with greater activity. So with a mercury base we have often to prefer this salt.
In the eye symptoms there is more excoriation. The pains, burning, smarting, etc., in the eruptions and ulcers are more violent. In Merc. we have slow spreading ulcers, but in Merc. cor. there is great eating; it will spread over an area as large as your hand in a night. He has the mercurial odor and sweat, and he is sallow; he needs mercury, but a more active preparation than Merc. viv.
Merc. cor. has decided symptoms of its own, but they are limited.
You cannot tell the ptyalism, or the lardaceous ulcers apart. In sore throat, if it is a Merc. case, the ulcers are spreading rapidly and burning and smarting like coals of fire, you would say that Merc. is not so intense as this. You need Merc. cor. for the violence, the intense burning, and the rapid spread. The throat is enormously swollen, the glands are swollen, and the thirst is insatiable.
In dysentery there is more violence; copious bleeding; great anxiety, can scarcely leave the stool a second, great tenesmus of rectum and bladder; urging to urination and stool is constant; great burning in the rectum. It is a violent case of dysentery. I would prefer Merc. in ordinary Merc. cases, but if this patient is not relieved he will not live, and Merc. cor. is needed here.
In the urinary organs the symptoms are violent. Albuminuria is more marked in Merc. cor. than in Merc. It is one of the most frequently indicated remedies in the albuminuria of pregnancy and a very useful remedy when gout is present.
From slight irritation of the foreskin of the male organ, the mucous membrane and skin contract and phimosis takes place. Merc. cor. relieves the itching and burning, and causes the purse-string to let up. It is seldom indicated in gonorrhoea, but is called for when there is greenish yellow or bloody watery discharge, with violent burning and urging to urination and to stool, and violent painful erections. Chancres spread with great rapidity.
Stitching, rending, tearing pains, here and there, especially in the chest.
MERCURIUS CYANATUS.
Given a Merc. base and diphtheria, when the membrane is greenish and inclined to spread through the nose and involve a large surface, the Cyanide of Mercury is needed. It has exudation more marked than any other form of Mercury. Malignant forms of diphtheria, rapidly forming, and with phagedenic ulceration.
MERCURIUS IODATUS FLAWS.
(Proto-iodide of Mercury.)
There are sore throats that especially call for the proto-iodide. When in sore throats the inflammation and pain predominantly affect the right side, and there is a tendency to remain on the right side, or if the Merc. state is present and the sore throat goes from right to left, it is the proto-iodide you want. The patient that needs this remedy for constitutional troubles will be worse during rest and from a warm room and better in the open air.
This is especially true when the patient needs Merc. prot. in neuritis of the right arm that comes on in writers. The arm then is very painful when writing, from passive motion, from rubbing, from pressure, from both heat and cold, but better from walking in the open air. Complaints are nearly all worse on the right side of the body.
MERCURIUS IODATUS RUBER.
(Bin-iodide of Mercury.)
Again, if in a Merc. patient with diphtheria, tonsillitis, etc., the inflammation and pain begin on the left side, and incline to remain there or spread to the right, the bin-iodide is indicated.
These two iodides have more rapid and greater induration beneath ulcers and chancres than Merc., and in old syphilitics the iodides are sometimes more useful.
MERCURIUS SULPHURIC.
(Sulphate of Mercury. Turpeth mineral.)
Merc. sulph. will sometimes help, when you have a case of hydro-thorax with quick, short breathing, etc., and burning of the chest. If you go to an old case of hypostatic congestion, with dropsy, or a case of dyspnoea from hydrothorax, when the Merc. base is present, you will be astonished at the action of this sulphate.
CINNABARIS.
(Red Sulphide of Mercury.)
The symptoms are worse at night from warmth of the bed, and when perspiring, like Mercurius. Worse from both heat and cold. Catarrhal inflammation. Fig warts (Thuja). Ulcers. Many complaints from eating. Syphilis in all stages. Suppurating glands; chancres. It is best to study this remedy as a form of Mercurius, which has a few cunning phases of its own. It is a deep acting remedy in sycosis. The patient desires to be alone. Aversion to mental work. Forgets things which he intended to do. Mind crowded with thoughts preventing sleep.
The pains in the head are violent; worse after eating; better by heat, and pressure. Fullness in the whole head. Constriction. Pain in the cold forehead, which is ameliorated by heat. Tearing in the forehead before the menstrual flow. Pain in the forehead and vertex in the morning, worse lying on the left side and back, ameliorated lying on the right side, and it passes off after rising. Shooting pains in the left side of the head with flow of saliva and copious urine. Headache with nosebleed. Sensitive scalp and skull. Supra-orbital neuralgia.
Stitching, and dull pains in the eyes. Inflammation of the conjunctiva; worse at night. Red, congested lids. Ptosis. Weak vision. Iritis of syphilitic origin. The symptoms are worse at night. Sharp paroxysmal pains from the warmth of the bed. Roaring in the ears after eating. Itching in the ears.
Cold spot on root of nose. Pressure on the bones of the nose. Coryza with dirty yellow mucus drawn from posterior nares. Epistaxis; pains in back and limbs. The symptoms of the teeth are similar to Mercurius.
Tongue coated white every morning. Taste putrid, metallic and bitter. Sore ulcerated mouth. Salivation. Inflammation of mouth and throat with great thirst, worse at night. Dry mouth, and viscid mucus in the throat. Fullness in the throat, with constant desire to swallow. Dryness of the throat.
Aversion to food. Eructations, and vomiting. Tenderness of the stomach. Syphilitic buboes. Dysentery, worse every night; bloody mucous stools; much straining. Diarrhoa with greenish stools, worse at night. Protrusion of anus during stool.
Copious urine. Pain as from an ulcer in urethra when urinating; it wakes him also at night. Albumin in the urine. Inflammation of glans penis with profuse secretion of pus. Increased sexual desire. Swelling of prepuce with much itching.
Warts on the prepuce and fraenum, bleeding when touched. Chancres on the prepuce of gangrenous odor. Inflamed and swollen chancres, hard, discharging pus. Indurated, or neglected chancres.
Gonorrhoea, of yellowish green discharge, much pain during flow of urine. Symptoms worse at night, and from the warmth of the bed. The patient is sensitive to both a warm room, and to cold air. Induration of testes.
Syphilitic Iaryngeal ulcers in a tubercular patient. Hoarseness in the evening. Pulse fast in the evening and night. Stiff neck with pains shooting to occiput. Stitching pains each side of spine in dorsal and lumbar regions, worse on deep breathing.
Pain in the limbs at night. Sensitive to sudden changes in the weather. Lame, bruised and stiff in all the limbs. Pains worse from motion. Syphilitic nodes on tibia. Pain in tendo Achillis and os calcis after walking. Numbness in the feet. Cold feet, day and night. Wandering gout.
Burning itching of the skin, worse scratching. Itching all over. Redness, and red spots on the skin. Pustules. Gangrenous ulcers. Elevated ulcers. It is antidoted by Hepar and Nitric acid. It is closely related to Thuja.
MERCURIUS CINNABARIS
(Red Sulphide of Mercury.)
The symptoms are worse at night from warmth of the bed, and when perspiring, like Mercurius. Worse from both heat and cold. Catarrhal inflammation. Fig warts (Thuja). Ulcers. Many complaints from eating. Syphilis in all stages. Suppurating glands; chancres. It is best to study this remedy as a form of Mercurius, which has a few cunning phases of its own. It is a deep acting remedy in sycosis.
The patient desires to be alone. Aversion to mental work. Forgets things which he intended to do. Mind crowded with thoughts preventing sleep.
The pains in the head are violent; worse after eating; better by heat, and pressure. Fulness in the whole head. Constriction. Pain in the cold forehead, which is ameliorated by heat. Tearing in the forehead before the menstrual flow. Pain in the forehead and vertex in the morning, worse lying on the left side and back, ameliorated lying on the right side, and it passes off after rising. Shooting pains in the left side of the head with flow of saliva and copious urine. Headache with nosebleed. Sensitive scalp and skull. Supra-orbital neuralgia.
Stitching, and dull pains in the eyes. Inflammation of the conjunctiva; worse at night. Red, congested lids. Ptosis. Weak vision. Iritis of syphilitic origin. The symptoms are worse at night. Sharp paroxysmal pains from the warmth of the bed.
Roaring in the ears after eating. Itching in the ears.
Cold spot on root of nose. Pressure on the bones of the nose. Coryza with dirty yellow mucus drawn from posterior nares. Epistaxis; pains in back and limbs.
The symptoms of the teeth are similar to Mercurius.
Tongue coated white every morning. Taste putrid, metallic and bitter. Sore ulcerated mouth. Salivation. Inflammation of mouth and throat with great thirst, worse at night. Dry mouth, and viscid mucus in the throat. Fulness in the throat, with constant desire to swallow. Dryness of the throat.
Aversion to food. Eructations, and vomiting. Tenderness of the stomach.
Syphilitic buboes.
Dysentery, worse every night; bloody mucous stools; much straining. Diarrhoa with greenish stools, worse at night. Protrusion of anus during stool.
Copious urine. Pain as from an ulcer in urethra when urinating; it wakes him also at night. Albumin in the urine.
Inflammation of glans penis with profuse secretion of pus. Increased sexual desire. Swelling of prepuce with much itching.
Warts on the prepuce and fraenum, bleeding when touched. Chancres on the prepuce of gangrenous odor. Inflamed and swollen chancres, hard, discharging pus. Indurated, or neglected chancres.
Gonorrhoea, of yellowish green discharge, much pain during flow of urine. Symptoms worse at night, and from the warmth of the bed. The patient is sensitive to both a warm room, and to cold air. Induration of testes.
Syphilitic Iaryngeal ulcers in a tubercular patient. Hoarseness in the evening.
Pulse fast in the evening and night.
Stiff neck with pains shooting to occiput. Stitching pains each side of spine in dorsal and lumbar regions, worse on deep breathing.
Pain in the limbs at night. Sensitive to sudden changes in the weather. Lame, bruised and stiff in all the limbs. Pains worse from motion. Syphilitic nodes on tibia. Pain in tendo Achillis and os calcis after walking. Numbness in the feet. Cold feet, day and night. Wandering gout.
Burning itching of the skin, worse scratching. Itching all over. Redness, and red spots on the skin. Pustules. Gangrenous ulcers. Elevated ulcers. It is antidoted by Hepar and Nitric acid. It is closely related to Thuja.
MERCURIUS IODATUS FLAWS
(Proto-iodide of Mercury.)
There are sore throats that especially call for the proto-iodide. When in sore throats the inflammation and pain predominantly affect the right side, and there is a tendency to remain on the right side, or if the Merc. state is present and the sore throat goes from right to left, it is the proto-iodide you want. The patient that needs this remedy for constitutional troubles will be worse during rest and from a warm room and better in the open air.
This is especially true when the patient needs Merc. prot. in neuritis of the right arm that comes on in writers. The arm then is very painful when writing, from passive motion, from rubbing, from pressure, from both heat and cold, but better from walking in the open air. Complaints are nearly all worse on the right side of the body.
MERCURIUS SULPHURIC
(Sulphate of Mercury. Turpeth mineral.)
Merc. sulph. will sometimes help, when you have a case of hydro-thorax with quick, short breathing, etc., and burning of the chest. If you go to an old case of hypostatic congestion, with dropsy, or a case of dyspnoea from hydrothorax, when the Merc. base is present, you will be astonished at the action of this sulphate.
NAJA
The use of Naja has extended far beyond its proving. So many of the Ophidian family present symptoms in common with it, that much has been presumed truly so. Many characteristics run through these remedies, each remedy having its own peculiar sphere. Taken together the family presents a wide range of curative action. Mure, of Brazil, thought that the snake family presented curative powers for the healing of the nations.
In the mineral kingdom, man may find his remedy when sick, so in the vegetable and animal kingdom. It is possible that the product of the serpent may be everything needed for the healing of man. Extend this to the whole animal kingdom and it is probably so. There seems to be everything existing in one kingdom that exists in another. The lowest is the mineral, the next the vegetable, and last the animal kingdom. If we had a perfect knowledge of any one kingdom, we could probably cover the entire scope of curative possibilities. But we have only a knowledge of a few remedies in each kingdom.
Another idea has been advanced that in any particular region, the vegetable kingdom provides all that is necessary for curing in that region. If we were acquainted with all the vegetable growths, how much we would know in comparison with what we do know! It is highly probable that there is a throwing off from the sick human race of something that is absorbed by the plants. The evils that are thrown off by man may be absorbed by the vegetable kingdom. Plants will correspond to men in the region in which they grow, if there is anything in this. In two thousand years there might be a necessity for some kind of a check upon the growth of plants. The absorption of these evils may cause them to vary in species, and if they continue to grow and each to absorb the evils from the human race, they will continue to differ. This favors evolution and explains it in a sense.
It is important to compare the symptoms of Naja with those of the other snakes. The patient is disturbed by closeness of the collar, < after sleep. There are exhaustion and trembling, trembling of the muscles. Its direction is somewhat like Lach., from left to right, i. e, the ovarian pains, the diphtheria, the joint affections go from left to right. Naja, like Lach., is < in damp weather. On inflamed stir faces it produces grayish exudations. It does not partake so exten sively of this character as do Lach. and Crotalus. There is only a shadow of the septic in Naja, but it is extensive in Lach. and extremely marked in Crotalus. Naja is not as subject to haemorrhage as either Lach. or CrotaIus.
There is trembling of the muscles, a rheumatic diathesis, and tendency of all complaints to settle about the heart. It is used in valvular troubles of the heart, in young persons who grow up with cardiac valvular diseases. The whole trouble settled about the heart. This suggests Naja, and Naja has often cured. If the valvular trouble is congenital it cannot be cured; but if not, it shows that all the disturbing forces have settled about the heart. All the symptoms have settled about the heart; Naja has this. In school boys and girls who have no symptoms this is the generic remedy for this kind of complaint. Always prescribe Naja unless guided away from it by some specific symptom.
Naja has more nervous, Lack more septic symptoms. Naja, marked agitation without sepsis, Lach., all the nervousness with a tendency to haemorrhage and sepsis; black blood, like charred straw; dark clotted blood.
Naja has surging of the blood upwards, like Lach. a distressing symptom. There is marked dyspnoea, cardiac or otherwise. There is stuffing up of the chest; great rawness of the trachea and larynx, the whole passage is raw as if excoriated.
There is much sneezing, with running of water from the nose; inability to lie down at night; dryness of the air passages of the nose; hay fever. The patient has suffocative attacks in August.
The whole chest is in a state of congestion; emptiness of the left side of the chest; low pulse or intermittent pulse. With all the complaints of the chest there is inability to lie on the left side. Numbness of the left arm. There is dyspnoea; if he goes to sleep, he wakes up suffocating, gasping, choking, or he starts from sleep as if from a dream. In most complaints there is inability to lie on the left side.
There is a dry, hacking cough with sweating in the palms of the hands that is cured by Naja. These cardiac cases are often attended by a dry, hacking cough, a cough with every little exertion. It is not a catarrhal state, nor is it tubercular. The heart beats slowly and will not be urged to work, and a cough comes on from exertion. Cactus also has a cardiac cough.
The extremities are cold and blue and the head hot. The head symptoms are < in a warm room; the head feels warm, fevered, yet the feet and limbs do not become warm. There is copious sweating of the hands and feet, causing the gloves and shoes to rot out; but the sweat is not offensive. There is a sense of fullness and puffiness of the hands and feet, showing a slow circulation in the veins which we might expect.
We might naturally expect that this patient would be intense and excitable, which is the case. There is a suicidal tendency. The headaches are nondescript; of a congestive character all over the head, especially in the occiput. Headaches accompanied by a quick and nervous pulse. Profound sleep is consistent with all the snakes. There is deep, profound sleep with stertorous breathing.
She wakes with a headache every morning. It is natural for the Naja headache to be present in the morning and wear off with exertion. The other complaints are < exertion. The mind symptoms are < exertion of the mind.
These are symptoms in connection with hay fever: The rawness in the throat and larynx; dreadful aching in the throat extending to the larynx, which swallowing does not relieve. The Lach. state is expressed more by a lump in the throat; grasping of the throat with a sense of choking.
The Naja patient is subject to severe attacks of bronchitis. There is rawness between the larynx and trachea, < after coughing. This is a great remedy in asthma, especially cardiac asthma. The breathing is so bad that he cannot lie down. Useful in chronic nervous palpitation; palpitation after exertion of any kind. Chronic nervous palpitation with inability to speak on account of choking.
There is a continued, dull, aching pain through the back between the shoulders, associated with cardiac affections. Sometimes there is little beside this sensation of heat, of aching, to indicate the remedy; he is so tired in that spot that he wants to lie down or lean backwards to rest his back.
The palpitation is < lying on the left side, < walking. This is the most useful of all the remedies we have in a cardiac state with very few symptoms. It is true that this region is particularly singled out by Naja to produce its symptoms.
NATRUM ARSENICOSUM
The symptoms of this remedy appear in the daytime, in the MORNING, in the forenoon, evening, night and after MIDNIGHT. The symptoms are worse in the cold air, but warm open air ameliorates; the mental symptoms are better in the open air; worse from cold in general; in cold air; becoming cold; in cold, wet weather; the patient takes cold easily. The symptoms are worse ascending. Anaemia and weakness and dropsy of the limbs. Complaints worse after eating. The body is losing flesh. The symptoms come on FROM EXERTION, Worse from butter, cold drinks, cold food, fats, fruits, milk, pork, vinegar. Formication all over the body and in the limbs; induration of glands; inflammation in any part. Marked physical irritability and irritable weakness. Jarring aggravates many symptoms. Lassitude prevails throughout the provings. Desire to lie down and not be disturbed; yet lying often makes the symptoms worse and aggravation is marked after lying. Still many symptoms are worse from motion; there is a strong aversion to motion. Mucous secretions are copious. After exposure to cold he becomes rheumatic. Aching, burning and pressing pains; sore pains; stitching pains in all parts; darting pains in all parts; downward and upward. Perspiration does not ameliorate. Pressure aggravates. General pulsation.
Pulse irregular. Rheumatic and malarial patients, oversensitive, internally and externally. Electric shocks in the body. Symptoms predominate on the right side. Wants to sit or lie and not be disturbed. There are symptoms before sleep, during sleep, and on waking; trembling is a strong symptom. Twitching of the muscles. Walking in the open air increases the physical symptoms, but improves the mental symptoms; walling fast excites many symptoms. Weakness in the morning, during menses, on slight exertion, while walking. Wet weather brings out the symptoms. Worse from wine and in winter.
Anger at trifles; furious from contradiction; complaints are made worse from anger. Anxiety in the evening in bed; at night in bed; apprehensive anxiety; during fever; on waking. Concentration of mind difficult in the house, better in the open air; confusion of mind Sin the evening. Conscientious about trifles. Discontented; discouraged and; at times, in despair. He is easily distracted. Dullness of mind, better in the open air. Easily excited. Mental exertion makes the symptoms worse. Fear in the evening on going to bed; in a crowd; of impending disease; of some evil; that something will happen; of people. Easily frightened; forgetful; he feels constantly hurried. Hysterical and her mind is very active; ideas very active. Imbecility, irritability, impatience; indifferent to all joy. Aversion to mental work and to business; aversion to reading; indolence; memory weak. Lamenting, laughing, loathing of life, loquacity. The mental symptoms are all mild. Mirthful, hilarious; prostration of mind. She becomes quarrelsome. Restlessness nights, tossing, anxious restlessness. Sadness in the evening; during fever. Sensitive to noise; startled easily, by noise, on going to sleep, from sleep. Suspicious. Indisposed to talk; disturbed by the conversation of people. Timidity with a vacant feeling of mind. Weeping. Vertigo while walking. When the above general symptoms are present in any considerable number the following particulars will yield to this remedy.
Hyperaemia of the brain with heat and fullness; fullness in the forehead. Subjective heat with objective coldness of forehead. Heaviness in the head, in the forehead. Empty feeling in the head. Numbness in forehead in the evening. Pain in the head: morning ; afternoon; evening; night, night on waking; better in the open air; catarrhal headache; with coryza; worse after eating; from becoming heated; worse from heat; from a jar; from light; before and during menses; from mental exertion; moving head; every motion jars head; from NOISE; paroxysmal pains; periodical headaches; from pressure; pulsating; worse in a room; after sleep; from stooping; tobacco smoke; from walking; in a warm room; from wine. Pain in the forehead; in the morning on waking; during the whole day; above the eyes, extending to the temples. Pain in the occiput; pain in the sides of the head; pain in the temples; right side, from temple to temple; pain in the vertex. Boring in the temples; right to left; with nausea; bursting in the head, in the forehead; drawing in the head, in the forehead; pressing pain in the head; in the forehead, in the occiput, in the temples; in the vertex; sharp pains above the right eye; shooting pains above the right eye. Sore and tender scalp; forehead. Stitching pains in the head; stunning pains in the head; tearing in the head; in the forehead in the sides of the head. Perspiration on the forehead. Pulsation in the head; forehead, temples, vertex; with fullness in the forehead.
The eye symptoms are worse in the morning; lids are stuck together in the morning; congested eyes and blood vessels; discharge of mucus from the eyes. Dryness. Sensation of enlargement of the eyes in the morning on waking. Granular lids. The eyes feel hot. Inflammation of the conjunctiva from cold or wind; worse in the morning, after night work; of the lids and margins. Injected veins. Lachrymation in the morning on waking, in the open air, on looking steadily, when reading, unable to open the lids. Pain in the eyes, worse in sunlight; from motion; while reading; while reading by gas light; while writing; better by warmth. Aching in and over the eyes; in the morning on waking. Burning in the eyes; in the evening, in the open air, while reading. Pressing pain in the eyes; smarting as from smoke; sore and tender when reading; stitching pains in the eyes. Paralysis of the upper lids; of the optic nerve. Photophobia in daylight. Pupils dilated: left eye larger than right. Redness of THE VEINS. Staring eyes; stiffness of the lids; of the eyeballs. Strabismus. Swollen eyes; LIDS; oedematous lids; supra-orbital oedema. Ulceration of the cornea. Weak eyes and vision; vision blurred; tires out when reading. Dark colors before the eyes. Vision dim, on looking long; wipes eyes for relief. Flickering, foggy vision. Hemiopia. Myopia. Sparks before the eyes.
The ears are hot; itching in the ears. Noises: morning, evening, with vertigo, humming, ringing, roaring, rushing in the right ear; singing, Pain in ears: morning, stitching, tearing, behind the ears. The ears feel stopped. Hearing acute; for noises; impaired.
Catarrh with pain in forehead and root of nose, post-nasal with viscid mucus. Coryza: worse in open air, with cough, fluent or dry, fluent alternating with dry; discharge: copious, crusts, dry bloody crusts, hard bluish mucus, offensive, purulent, suppressed, thick, viscid, WATERY, yellow. Dryness in nose. Epistaxis after removing crusts from nose; bright red blood. Obstruction of nose at night (right); morning on waking; mucous membrane thickened and it is difficult to breathe through the nose. Ozaena. The nose is red. Pain in the nose, in the root of nose; burning, pressing at root of nose; rawness in nose. Smell acute at first, later wanting. Frequent, violent sneezing.
Corners of lips cracked and indurated. Discoloration of the face; bluish, around eyes; earthy; PALE; red; yellow; liver spots. Face is drawn. Eruptions on the face; forehead and lips; AROUND THE MOUTH; on the nose; comedones; herpes on lips; moist eruptions; pimples; vesicles. The face is hot and itching. Pain on moving the jaw. The face feels puffed. Stiffness of muscles of mastication. Swelling in the morning on waking; molar bones feel swollen; oedematous; swollen parotids. Twitching of face. Ulcer on the lips.
Aphthae in the mouth; bleeding gums; cracked and corrugated tongue. Discoloration: redness of mouth and tongue; white tongue; yellow tongue. Dryness of mouth; tongue; flabby tongue. Inflammation of mouth and tongue. Salivation and saliva is viscid. Stammering speech. Taste bitter in the morning; metallic, saltish, SOUR, sweetish. Ulceration in mouth. Vesicles in mouth and on tongue; burning. The teeth become loose. Pain in the teeth; night; pulsating; warmth ameliorates; jerking pain, tearing pains
Choking; constriction of oesophagus; dryness in throat; worse in the morning; after a cold. Throat red and glossy, purple red; hawks frequently to raise white mucus, worse in the open air. Inflammation; dark red, covered with yellow mucus. Sensation of a lump in the throat; gray exudation in the throat. It is said to have cured diphtheria. Mucus in the throat; tough gelatinous, greyish, yellow, white, from posterior nares. Pain in throat on swallowing, on empty swallowing, but no pain on swallowing food or drink; burning, sore, stitching. Roughness in the throat; scraping in the throat. Swallowing difficult. Swollen pharynx, uvula and tonsils; oedematous ; uvula hangs down like a water bag. Constriction in the region of the thyroid gland. Stiffness in the sides of the neck.
Appetite increased, ravenous, wanting; aversion to fats, to meat, to his cigar; sensation of constriction in the stomach. Desires beer, bread, cold drinks, sweet things. Disordered stomach; by milk. Stomach is distended; sensation of emptiness; eructations afternoon, after eating; empty, tasting of food, SOUR after eating, waterbrash. Fullness in the stomach after eating. Heartburn, Flushes of heat, heaviness after eating. HICCOUGH after eating, indigestion is very marked. Loathing of food. Nausea: after eating; constant; during cough; after cold drinks; with headache; during menses. Pain in the stomach: AFTER EATING; burning after warm things; cramping; CUTTING; gnawing; pressing after eating; soreness; stitching. Pulsation in the stomach. Retching when raising mucus from the throat. Sinking sensation. Sensation of a stone in the stomach. Tension in the stomach. Thirst: morning; evening; night; burning thirst; extreme thirst; unquenchable thirst; drinks often but small drinks. Thirstlessness. Vomiting: on coughing; after eating; bile; bitter; blood; mucus; sour; watery.
Distension of abdomen after eating; flatulence; fullness, gurgling, hardness. Heavy feeling in abdomen. Inflammation of liver; spleen. Liver affections. Pain in the abdomen: at night; after eating; from flatus; before a diarrhoea; before stool; better after stool and after passing flatus; in hypochondria; hypogastrium; in region of umbilicus. Cramping; before stool, better by passing flatus and stool. Cutting; before stool. Drawing in abdomen; in hypochondria. Sore, tender abdomen; in hypochondria. Stitching in abdomen; in hypochondria; in inguinal region; in spleen. Nervous feeling in abdomen Rumbling in abdomen; as if a diarrhoea would come on. Affections of the spleen. Swollen inguinal glands. Tension in abdomen, in hypochondria.
Constipation, alternating with diarrhoea; stool hard. Diarrhoea: evening; daytime; morning; drives him out of bed; NIGHT; after midnight; frequent stool during daytime; from becoming cold; from cold drinks; from taking cold; worse after eating; during menses; AFTER MILK; after vegetable; stool: bloody, copious, frequent, mucous, painless, pasty, scanty, soft, thin, watery, yellow. Excoriation of anus. Flatus copious and offensive. Itching of anus. Pain: BURNING during and after stool; cramping, better after stool; cutting, during stool and in the hypogastrium; before stool; soreness and stitching; tearing during stool; tenesmus during stool. Urging to stool; ineffectual; after stool.
Sore pain in bladder relieved by urinating; urging to urinate at night; constant; frequent. Urination difficult; frequent; involuntary at night in sleep; unsatisfactory. Burning and aching in the kidneys. Burning in the urethra when passing urine. Urine: ALBUMINOUS; burning; dark; pale; copious at night; clear as water; offensive; scanty; with mucus and phosphate. Specific gravity decreased; Iwo.
Morning erections; incomplete. Inflammation of glans penis, prepuce and testes. Stitching of the genitals, penis, scrotum. Soreness left testis. Seminal emissions. Swollen penis and testes. In the female the desire is increased. Leucorrhoea: copious; offensive; thick; yellow. Menses: copious; too soon; protracted; scanty. Metrorrhagia. Pain in the uterus.
Dryness and constriction in the larynx; scraping slate-colored mucus from the larynx; mucus is detached with difficulty; burning and soreness in the larynx; roughness in larynx. The symptoms of the larynx are worse from dust, smoke or cold air. Voice: hoarseness with coryza; lost; weak. Respiration is fast and deep; miner's asthma from coal dust; difficult on ascending, short.
Cough: morning; afternoon; evening; night; from deep breathing; dry at night; in the morning and from exertion; dry teasing cough all day; exhausting; hacking; from irritation in larynx and trachea; loose; racking, short, spasmodic; from tickling in larynx and trachea; violent; worse in a warm room. Expectoration: morning, evening, bloody, difficult, mucous, OFFENSIVE, PURULENT, tasting bitter, flat, putrid, viscid, yellow.
Anxiety and constriction of the chest. Eruptions, pimples. Sensation of fullness in the chest. Haemorrhagge from the lungs. Pneumonia and phthisis in miners from dust of coal. Irritation in the bronchial tubes in the morning. Oppression of chest on exertion and deep breathing; heart. Pain in the chest, during cough; in the heart; burning, cutting below the seventh rib; pressing; rawness; sore from coughing; stitching. Palpitation of the heart: night; anxious; ascending steps; exertion; tumultuous. Sensation as if he had inhaled smoke.
Coldness of the back at night. Stitching of the cervical region. Pain in the back: evening; night; worse walking; in the scapulae; between the scapulae; on bending forward and on breathing; in the lumbar region when stooping and walking; in the sacrum both when walking and sitting; aching in the back; drawing pain in the back; sore pain in the back; sore pain in the sacrum when walking and stooping; sore pain in cervical region; sore pain under scapulae; sore pain in spine on pressure. Stiffness in the cervical region, weakness in the back.
Awkwardness of the limbs; cold hands and FEET; cramps in calf; in soles. Eruptions on limbs; thin white scales; vesicles. Excoriation between the thighs. Formication of the feet. Heaviness, a tired feeling in lower limbs, in feet. Itching of all the limbs. Jerking in the lower limbs. Lameness in the limbs. Numbness in the feet. Pain in the limbs; in the joints, during chill; neuralgic pain in limbs; RHEUMATIC; gouty pains; upper limbs; right arm rheumatic; shoulder; rheumatic pain in shoulder and elbow; palms painful; pain in fingers. Pain in lower limbs; sciatica worse walking; in the hip; thigh when walking; knee. Aching down front of legs; bruised pain in limbs from continued motion; burning feet and soles, crampy pain in calf; flying pains in fingers, palms and forearms; drawing pains in lower limbs, thigh, knees, calf; neuralgic pain from axilla to little finger; stitching pain in hip, thigh, hip to knee on motion; knee, leg; tearing pains in upper limbs, in lower limbs, in thigh, legs, ankles, foot. Perspiration of hands, of feet. Pulsation of limbs. Restlessness of the limbs, upper limbs, lower limbs, legs. Stiffness of limbs, joints, wrists. Swelling of limbs: dropsical; legs; feet. Trembling hands; lower limbs. Twitching upper limbs; thighs. Weakness of the limbs; upper limbs; hands; lower limbs; thighs; legs; ANKLES; feet.
The sleep is deep. Dreams: amorous; anxious; frightful; of murder; nightmare; pleasant; vexatious; vivid. Late falling asleep; restless sleep. Sleepiness in the afternoon. Sleeplessness before midnight; after midnight; with sleepiness. Unrefreshing sleep. WAKING EARLY, frequently.
Chill morning; forenoon; evening in bed; in cold air; coldness comes on at night in bed; chilliness, internal chill; shaking chill in the morning; chill at 2 A. M.; 1 P. M.; 2 P. M.; the chill is relieved in a warm room.
Fever at night; dry heat, flushes of heat, perspiration absent Perspiration: morning; nights; from anxiety; in bed; cold; on coughing; on slight exertion; following the fever; on motion; profuse at night; symptoms worse while perspiring; aversion to uncovering while perspiring.
Burning skin; cold skin; desquamation. Liver spots, red spots, yellow skin; dryness of the skin. Eruptions: blisters; boils; burning; moist; herpes; itching in warmth; painful; pimples; scaly; thin white scales; stinging, suppurating tubercles; urticaria; nodules; vesicular erysipelas, with swelling, worse after scratching; formication of skin; itching, crawling, worse after scratching. Swelling of skin with burning. Ulcers: burning; deep; yellow discharge; spreading; stinging.
NATRUM CARBONICUM
Proved by Hahnemann, Hering and others. Persons who are in the habit of taking carbonate of soda for sour stomach get a proving of this remedy. I have met some of these people and been able to confirm many Natrum symptoms.
Old dyspeptics who are always belching and have sour stomach and rheumatism; after twenty years they are stoop-shouldered, pale, sensitive to cold, chilly, aggravated by the least draft; require much clothing; unable to resist the cold or the heat; require a medium climate; are worse from the changes of the weather; their digestive, rheumatic, and gouty troubles are all worse from the weather changes. A state of trepidation from the slightest noise, the slam of a door; nervous excitement and palpitation with great prostration; nervous weakness with trepidation; weakness from slight exertion of mind or body; internal and external trembling. The rattling of paper causes palpitation, irritability and melancholy. Estrangement from family and friends. Aversion to mankind and to society; to relatives, to strangers; feels a great division between himself and them; sensitive to certain persons. Music causes a tendency to suicide, melancholy, weeping and trepidation; playing the piano is so exhausting that she must lie down; music causes great sadness which increases to religious insanity. This is true of all the Sodiums, but, especially so of Natrum cub.; aggravation from the slam of a door, a pistol shot, which causes headache and complaints in general, aggravated from music.
The more soda these patients take, the more flatulent do they become; they are stoop-shouldered; digestion is difficult, and finally milk will not digest at all, bringing on a diarrhoea with undigested, lienteric stools; also, starch causes flatulence and looseness of the bowels. Many symptoms from drinking cold water when overheated. Urine offensive like that of a horse, from a vegetable or milk diet. This is not so marked as in Nitric ac., but resembles it.
Natrum carb. throws out eruptions upon the knuckles and fingertips; also the toes; vesicular eruptions open up and form ulcers on the joints or finger-tips. Borax, Sepia, Ars., and Natrum carb. are the remedies most inclined to produce ulceration of the tips and knuckles of the fingers, and also the toes.
Vesicular eruptions on the body in patches and circles ; the herpes family is especially related to Natr. carb.; zona, herpes labialis, herpes preputialis ; patches as large as a dollar on the hips, thighs and back. Smaller patches show vesicles containing a white serum; burning, smarting and itching, better from scratching. The eruption passes away with a crust, but will often ulcerate, it does not heal and an ulcer forms. Circulation feeble; wounds suppurate. Feet and skin burn. Crusty eruptions on the skin that have not been vesicular; but most Natr. carb. and Natr. mur. eruptions are of the vesicular form. Tingling, biting, itching, changing place, now here and now there; cold skin; sweaty body.
Nervous exhaustion, physical exhaustion, weakness of mind and body. Bookkeepers lose the ability to add up figures. In reading a page, the one previous to it soon goes out of the mind. The memory will not hold out from the beginning to the end of a sentence. Forgets what he reads. Confusion of mind follows and then he is unable to perform any mental labor. Men become so fatigued from the details of business that a confusion of the mind comes over them, they get brain fag.
Oversensitive to heat, especially after sunstroke, even some years after; has to be well shaded when walking in the sun, must seek a cool or dark place; the patient has not had the proper acute remedy during the attack; the remedy is aggravated by both cold and heat, but this is a special aggravation from the heat of the sun; head troubles are not worse from cold in Natr. carb. Old cases of brain-fag with weakness and trepidation. The body troubles are aggravated from cold and in the winter; as cold as if he had no blood in the body, extremities cold, and he cannot get them warm; cold as ice to the knees and elbows. The body and extremities are worse in winter, the head in summer.
Anxious trembling and sweating during pains. The senses are all disturbed; oversensitive to light; pain in the eves from a bright light. Oversensitive hearing; little noises seem enormous, like thunder; the crumpling of paper seems like the crashing of a water-fall. Taste perverted, too sensitive, so that the tasting of things ordinarily grateful becomes painful; sometimes loss of taste.
Loss of smell. Hay-fever, catarrhal fever; where catarrhal conditions are present there is copious, thick, yellow, purulent discharge from the eyes, nose, vagina. The vesicles are filled with thin, white serum, but the pustule, when it ruptures, throws out a thick, yellow discharge. Leucorrhoea thick, yellow, ropy; gonorrhoea of the same character; thick, yellow, ropy, purulent discharge from the bladder which clogs up the urethra when urinating.
Otalgia, with sharp, darting piercing pains; when the mental state, the chilliness and other generals are present. The discharges are commonly offensive.
Coryzas trouble much; always has a cold in the head; the watery discharge is of short duration, and is soon followed by a thick copious flow of yellow mucus. Ulceration, thick crusts; sleeps at night with the mouth open; dry, yellow crusts are blown out with pain and bleeding. The catarrh increases with each fresh cold, until it becomes foetid; the bones of the nose are affected; almost a constant headache over the eyes, in the forehead, at the root of the nose; congestive headaches, worse from change of weather, cold room, damp weather; increased by every storm. Most foetid ozaena, mucous membranes ulcerated and destroyed.
Pale face with blue ring around the eyes, yellow blotches on the forehead, puffiness. There is puffiness in general; the hands, feet, face pit on pressure; infiltration of the cellular tissue; those states of the heart and kidneys that favor dropsies; old malarial cases, flesh doughy; urine albuminous. Enlargement of the glands with induration, axillary, inguinal, abdominal, salivary. Especially suitable for enlargement of the prostate in old men. Chronic enlargement of the parotids, slow and of long duration; of the tonsils.
Ulcerations of the mouth; nursing sore mouth in women; thrush in infants; little white aphthous patches, especially in nervous, withered infants who cannot stand any kind of milk, who have diarrhoea from milk; they thrive better on cereals; when asleep the child jumps, cries, springs up and grasps the mother; a nervous, cold baby, easily startled like the Borax baby. So are the Natrum babies in general.
Accumulation of mucus in the throat and posterior nares, generally yellow in color, while with Natr. mur., it is white; the latter spits up copious, thick, white mouthfuls.
Natr. carb. is ameliorated by eating; when chilly, he eats and is able to keep warm; the pains are ameliorated after eating; he has an all-gone feeling and pain in the stomach which drives him to eat; he gets hungry at 5 A. M. and 2 P. M. 5 A. M. is the favorite time for the Natr. carb. aggravation; he becomes so hungry at this time that he is forced out of bed to eat something, which also ameliorates the pain. Headache, chilliness, and palpitation better from eating (Ignat., Sepia, Sulph.). Nervous hunger in pregnant women, who cannot sleep unless they get up at night and eat crackers, calls for Psorinum.
Locomotor ataxia with its fulgurating pains, amel. by eating; gnawing, all-gone, hungry feeling in the stomach. Soles numb, in males erections and priapism, sensitive thighs, hypersensitive spine; the results of too much excitement. Emissions; ejaculation of semen premature. Thirst in the afternoon, incessant; thirst between chill and heat; great desire for cold water a few hours after dinner. Extreme aversion to milk.
Flatulency and accumulation of wind in the bowels; diarrhoea; stool yellow, soft with violent tenesmus and urging; a yellow substance like the. pulp of an orange in the stool; diarrhoea from milk. The most troublesome constipation; stool hard, dark, smooth and crumbling. All the Natrums take away the desire to go to stool; no ability to bear down, stool large and hard, great effort to pass it. Prostatorrhoea after urinating and a difficult stool.
Sterility, a constitutional state in a woman where she is unable to conceive; she is nervous, cold to the knees and elbows; cold body in winter, hot head in summer; always tired; relaxation of the sphincter vaginae causing the seminal fluid to gush out as soon as ejaculated by the male, thus causing sterility. There may be a spasm of the sphincter, producing the same effect, or a clot of blood or mucus shoots from the vagina with noisy flatus. Nervous, fidgety, excitable, lean, dyspeptic women, not hysterical. Menses too soon or too late; neuralgias, oversensitive to drafts and dampness, sensitive spine, legs numb; leucorrhoea yellowish-green, copious.
Paralytic states; ptosis or spasms of the lids; difficult swallowing, must drink much water to wash the food down on account of paralysis of the pharynx; paralysis of the bowels, cannot bear down at stool; stool like sheep's dung; paralysis of the left lower extremity with tingling.
Palpitation at night when ascending and while lying on left side. Many spinal symptoms. Goitre. Stiffness of the neck, violent backache after walking. Rheumatic pains in the extremities. Jerking in all the limbs. Stumbling while walking. Weak ankles in children. Heaviness of the legs. Pain in the hollow of the knees on motion. Tension in the bend of the knee. Easy dislocation of the ankle. The soles burn while walking. Ulceration of the heel from blisters. Icy cold feet. Weakness of the legs. Vesicles on tips of fingers and toes. Spots and tubercles on the skin. Skin dry and cracked. Itching and crawling.
NATRUM MURIATICUM
Salt is so common an article of diet that it has been assumed that it could be of no use in medicine. This is only the opinion of men who operate entirely on the tissues. There are no constitutional effects from crude salt.
One may find an individual growing thin with all the symptoms of salt; he is taking salt in great quantities, but digesting none of it. Salt will be found in the stool, for it does not enter into the life. There is a Natr. mur. inanition, a starving for salt. The same is true of lime. Children can get plenty of lime from their food and that is better when the salt or the lime is given in such shape that it cannot be resisted by the internal man aimed not at the house he lives in but at the individual himself then the bone, salt inanition, the Natr. mur. inanition, will soon pass away. 'We do not with our small dose supply the salt that the system needs, but we cure the internal disease, we turn into order the internal physical man, and then the tissues get salt enough from the food. Drugs must all be administered in suitable form. We may need to go higher and higher until the secret spring is touched.
Natr. mur. is a deep acting, long acting remedy. It takes a wonderful hold of the economy, making changes that are lasting when given in potentized doses. A great deal is presented that can be seen by looking at the patient, so that we say: this looks like a Natr. mur. patient. Experienced physicians learn to classify patients by appearance. The skin is shiny, Pale, waxy, looks as if greased. There is a wonderful prostration of a peculiar kind. Emaciation, weakness, nervous prostration, nervous irritability.
There is a Iong chain of mental symptoms; hysterical condition of the mind and body; weeping alternating with laughing; irresistible laughing at unsuitable times; prolonged, spasmodic laughter. This will be followed by tearfulness, great sadness, joylessness. No matter how cheering the circumstances are she cannot bring herself into the state of being joyful. She is benumbed to impressions, easily takes on grief, grieves over nothing. Unpleasant occurrences are recalled that she may grieve over them. Consolation aggravates the state of the mind the melancholy, the tearfulness, sometimes brings on anger. She appears to bid for sympathy and is mad when it is given. Headache comes on with this melancholy. She walks the floor in rage. She is extremely forgetful; cannot cast up accounts; is unable to meditate; forgets what she was going to say; loses the thread of what she is hearing or reading. There is a great prostration of the mind.
Unrequited affection brings on complaints. She is unable to control her affections and falls in love with a married man. She knows that it is foolish but lies awake with love for him. She falls in love with a coachman. She knows that she is unwise but cannot help it. In cases of this kind Natr. mur. will turn her mind into order, and she will look back and wonder why she was so silly. This remedy belongs to hysterical girls.
In a mental state where Ign. temporarily benefits the symptoms, but does not cure, its chronic, Natr. mur. should be given. It is as well to give Natr. mur. at once if there is an underlying constitutional state too deep for Ign. Aversion to bread, to fats and rich things.
The Natr. mur. patient is greatly disturbed by excitement, is extremely emotional. The whole nervous economy is in a state of fret and irritation, < from noise, the slamming of a door, the ringing of a bell, the firing of a pistol, < music. The pains are stitching, electric-like shocks, convulsive jerkings of the limbs on falling asleep, twitchings, shooting pains. She is oversensitive to all sorts of influences, is excitable, emotional, intense.
Complaints come on in the warm room, worse in the house, she wants the open air. The mental complaints are > in the open air. She takes cold easily from sweating, but is generally > in the open air, though worse on getting heated, < by sufficient exertion to heat up, but > by moderate exertion in the cold air. Both. Natr. carb. and Natr. mur. have the general nervous tension of Natrona but one is a chilly patient, the other warm blooded.
The face is sickly looking, the skin greasy, shiny, sallow, yellow, often chlorotic, covered with vesicular eruptions around the edges of the hair, the ears and back of -the neck. There are scaly and squamous eruptions, with great itching, oozing a watery fluid, or sometimes dry, An exfoliation takes place, a shining surface is left In the meatus, scales form and peel off, leaving an oozing surface. Watery vesicles form about the lips and wings of the nose, about the genitals and anus. Vesicular eruptions, white, oozing a watery fluid, come and go. Great itching of the skin is present
The skin looks waxy, dropsical. There is great emaciation, the skin looking dry, withered, shrunken. An infant looks like a little old man. There is a down on the face that passes away when improvement sets in. Emaciation takes place from above downward. The collar-bones become prominent and the neck looks scrawny, but the hips and lower limbs remain plump and round. Lyc. also has emaciation from above downward. The directions of remedies will often enable us to distinguish one from another.
The characteristic discharge from the mucous membranes is watery or thick whitish, like the white of an egg. There is a marked coryza with a watery discharge, but the constitutional state has thick, white discharges. He hawks out a thick, white discharge in the morning. There are gluey oozings from the eyes. From the ears flows a thick, white, gluey discharge. The leucorrhoea is white and thick. With the gonorrhoea the discharge has existed a long time and become gleety. There is smarting in the urethra only after urination.
The headaches are awful; dreadful pains; bursting, compressing, as if in a vise; the head feels as if the skull would be crushed in. The pains are attended with hammering and throbbing. Pain like little hammers in the head on beginning to move. Hammering pains in the head on waking in the morning. The pain comes on in the latter part of sleep. There is great nervousness during the first part of the night; she falls asleep late and awakes with hammering in the head. There are also headaches beginning at to or II A. M., lasting until 3 P. M. or evening. The headaches are periodical, every day, or third day, or fourth day. Headaches of those living in malarial districts, > from sleep; the patient must go to bed and be perfectly quiet, > from sweating, headaches associated with intermittent fever. During the chill it seemed as though the head would burst; he is delirious and drinks large quantities of cold water. There is no relief to the head until after the sweat. Sometimes all the symptoms are relieved by the sweat except the headache.
In another form of headache; the greater the pain the more the sweat; sweating does not relieve; the forehead is cold, covered with a cold sweat. When the head is covered warmly he is > moving-about in the open air.
Headache due to disturbance of vision where there is inability to focus rapidly enough Headache < from noise. Headache involving the whole back of the head and even going down the spine in troubles following the brain diseases, hydrocephalus.
In spinal troubles, when there is great sensitiveness to pressure an irritable spine. The vertebrae are sensitive and there is a great deal of aching along the spine. Coughing aggravates the pain in the spine, also walking makes it worse, but it is > from lying on something hard, or pressing the back up against something hard; they may sit with a pillow or the hand pressed against the back. In menstrual troubles you find the woman lying with some hard object under the spine. A general nervous trembling pervades the body. There is jerking of the muscles, trembling of the limbs, inability to keep the limbs still, as in Zincum.
The stomach and liver are closely related. The stomach is distended with flatus. After eating there is a lump in the stomach. It seems to take a long time for food to digest. < from eating. Whitish, slimy mucus is vomited attended with relief. There is great thirst for cold water, sometimes there is relief from drinking, sometimes the thirst is unquenchable. We find fullness in the region of the liver with stitching, tearing pains. The bowels are distended with gas. There is slowing down of the action of the bowels, the stool being very difficult, in hard, agglomerated lumps. There is slowing down of the action of the bladder. Must wait before the urine will start, and then it comes slowly dribbles; there is not much force in the flow. After urination there is a sensation as if more urine remained in the bladder. If anyone is present he cannot pass urine, cannot pass it in a public place. There is also continued urging, he must pass the urine often.
This remedy and Natr. sulph. were used by the homoeopaths to clear up chronic diarrhoea, the old army diarrhoea. Natr. mur. is useful in the complaints of women, in troublesome menstruation. There is a- great variety of menstrual complaints: menses too scanty or too free, too late or too soon. We cannot individualize from the menstrual symptoms, we must do it from the constitutional state. Examine every possible function to be sure you have all the symptoms. Examine every organ, not by examining it physically, for results of diseases do not -lead to the remedy, but examine the symptoms.
Observe the rapidity with which remedies affect the human system; there are some that are long acting, deep acting. Natr. mur. is one of these. It operates very slowly, bringing about its results after a long time, as it corresponds to complaints that are slow, that are long action.
This does not mean that it will not act rapidly; all remedies act rapidly, but not all act slowly; the longest acting may act in acute diseases, but the short acting cannot act long in chronic diseases. Get the pace, the periodicity of remedies. Some remedies have a continued fever, some a remittent, others an intermittent fever. In Aeon., Bell. and Bry. we have three different paces, three different motions, three different forms of velocity; so in Sulph., Graph., Natr. mur., Carbo. veg. a different form, a different development. Some would not hesitate in a continued fever to give Bell., but its complaints come on in great haste, with great violence and have nothing in their nature like a continued fever. This is not like typhoid. Bell. and Aeon. have no manifestations of typhoid, even if the symptoms are present. Be sure that the remedy has not only the group of symptoms, but also the nature of the case. The typhoid case has a likeness in Bry. or Rhus, but not in Bell. We owe no obedience to man, not even to our parents, after we are old enough to think for ourselves. We owe obedience to truth.
Natr. mur. is a long acting remedy; its symptoms continue for years; it conforms to slow-coming, long-lasting, deep-seated symptoms. It requires a long time for a man to be brought under the influence of it, even when moderately sensitive.
The chill comes in the morning at 10.3o; every day, every other day, every third or fourth day. The chill begins in the extremities which become blue; there is throbbing pain in the head, the face is flushed; delirium, talking of everything, constant, maniacal actions. They grow worse until a congestive attack comes. During the entire attack there is thirst for cold water. During the coldness he is not > by heat, not > by piling on the clothing, but wants cold drinks. We would naturally suppose that a person freezing to death would want warm things, but the Natr. mur. patient cannot bear them. The teeth chatter, he tosses from side to side, the bones ache as if they would break, and there is vomiting as in congestive conditions. In the fever he is so hot that the fingers are almost scorched with the intense heat, and he goes into a congestive sleep or stupor. The sweat relieves him; the aching all over is > by the sweat, and in time the headache passes away. There is intense chill, fever and sweat Sometimes the attacks are in robust, strong people, but usually in the anaemic, in emaciated people full of malaria; lingering, chronic cases. Complaints do not always have this long prodrome. Its most string use is in cases that have been living a long time in malarial swamps; saturated with the malarial atmosphere; they are anaemic, often dropsical; in old cases flint have been mixed with arsenic and quinine, the crude drugs used by the Old School to break the fever as long as the patient is under their sway, but the patient is sick internally even more than before, and when the condition comes back it is generally in its original form; the crude drug is usually unable to change the type of an intermittent fever. Remedies only partly related to the case will change the character of the sickness so that no one can cure the case. The homoeopathic remedy will cure intermittent fever every time if you get the right remedy. If there is a failure the case is mixed up so that no one may be able to cure it. First of all a master must realize the case and turn it into order so that it can then be cured. There are few men who never spoil a case of ague, because many cases come to them partly developed, masked cases, the symptoms not being all out, especially in cases that have taken homoeopathic remedies. The homoeopathic failures are the worst failures on earth.
Natr. mur. is irregular enough in its nature to develop the chills into regularity. When it has come into better order, wait: either the whole case will subside, or another remedy will be clear. There are other remedies that can turn cases into order. Often cases spoiled by homoeopaths can be turned into order by Sep. Marked cases with congestion of the head aching in the back and nausea are turned into order by Ipecac. The cure is permanent after homoeopathic prescribing; the chills do not return.
Natr. mur. not only removes the tendency to intermittents, but restores the patient to health, and takes away the tendency to colds, the susceptibility to colds, and to periodicity. It is the susceptibility that is removed. We know that every attack predisposes to another attack. Each attack of ague is more destructive than the previous one. The drugs used increase the susceptibility; the homoeopathic remedy removes the susceptibility. Homoeopathic treatment tends to simplify the human economy and to make diseases more easily managed. Unless this susceptibility be eradicated, man goes- down lower and lower into emaciation, emaciation from above downwards.
Children born in a malarial region are likely to go into marasmus. They have a voracious appetite, a wonderful hunger, eating much, but all the time emaciating. Conditions of pregnancy. The mammary glands waste, there is wasting of the upper parts of the body. The uterus is intensely sore.
The leucorrhoea, which is at first white, turns green. Women take cold in every draft of air. There is pain during sexual congress with of the vagina; a feeling as though sticks pressed into the walls of the vagina; pricking pains. There is dryness of all mucous membranes; everywhere the membranes are dry. The throat is dry, red, patulous; a sensation of a fishbone jagging into it when swallowing; there is inability to swallow without washing down the food with liquids; there is sticking all the way down the oesophagus.
Most prescribers give Hep. for every sticking or fishbone sensation in the throat; this is the old keynote, the old routine. Nitr. ac., Argent. nit., Alum. and Natr. mur. all have it, but all differently.
Hep. The tonsils are swollen, full, purple, quinsy. The patient is sensitive to the slightest draught, there is pain in the throat even on putting the hand out of bed; he sweats in the night with no relief; he is sensitive to every impression; feels everything ten times amplified.
Nitr. ac. There are yellow patches in the throat; ragged, jagged ulcers in the throat, or it is inflamed and purple. The urine smells like horses' urine.
Argent. nit. There is much hoarseness, the vocal cords being disturbed. The throat is swollen, patulous; the patient wants cold things, cold water, cold air. Adapted to those cases that have had ulceration of the os uteri with cauterization.
Natr. mur. There is extreme dryness of the mucous membranes, as if they would break; chronic dryness without ulceration. There is much catarrhal discharge like the white of an egg, with dryness of the mucous membranes when not covered by this mucus. The patient is extremely sensitive, sensitive to a change of weather. Every remedy has its own pace, its order of succession. We must bear in mind the order of succession.
Natr. mur. is useful in old dropsies, especially dropsy of cellular tissues. Sometimes there is dropsy of sacs, dropsy of the brain following acute diseases. In acute spinal meningitis with extreme nervous tension, where there is chronic drawing back of the head, chronic jerking of the head forward. Acute diseases that result in hydrocephalus, or in irritation of the spine. Sometimes useful in abdominal dropsy, but more often in oedemas of the lower extremities. Acute dropsies after scarlet fever; the patient is oversensitive, starts in his sleep, rises up in the night with confusion; there are albumen and casts in the urine.
In dropsy after the malaria Natr. mur., when it acts curatively, generally brings back the original chill The only care known to man is from above down, from within out, and in the reverse order of coming. When it is otherwise, there is only improvement, not cure. When the symptoms return there is hope; that is the road to cure and there is no other.
The skin symptoms are sometimes very striking. In old lingering cases where the skin looks transparent as if the patient would become dropsical, a waxy, greasy, shiny skin; other remedies with greasy, shiny skin are Plumb., Thuja, Selen. These remedies go deep into the life. Any remedy that can produce such wonderful changes is long-acting.
Useful after labor when the mother does not progress well; she is feeble and excitable; the lochia is prolonged, copious and white; the hair falls out from the head and genitals; the milk passes away, or the child does not thrive on it. Useful in afterpains where there is subinvolution of the uterus, the uterus is in a state of prolonged congestion. She is < noise, music, the slamming of a door. She craves salt and has an aversion to bread, wine and fat things. Sour wines disorder the stomach. Natr. mur. will clear up the case, restore the milk, turn the case into order.
Natr. mur. is needed by those chlorotic girls who have a greasy skin, a greenish, yellowish complexion; who menstruate only once in two or three months. The menses are copious, or scanty and watery. Where the symptoms agree, this remedy can eradicate this chlorosis and turn the countenance into a picture of health, but not in a short time. It takes years to establish health in a typical chlorosis; the cut finger bleeds only water; the menstrual flow is only a leucorrhoea; there is pernicious anaemia. Natr. mur. goes deep enough into the life to restore the pink complexion.
NATRUM PHOSPHORICUM
We are not dependent upon Schuessler alone for indications for this remedy, as we have many pathogenetic symptoms. Schuessler's indications were good and mostly confirmed by clinical observations. The author has given this remedy for twenty years to many patients whose nerves were in a fret from mental exertion and sexual excesses and vices. The symptoms are worse in the morning, EVENING and night, and after midnight. There is marked anaemia and aversion to the open air. He is aggravated from a draft, from open air, from cold, from becoming cold and after becoming cold, and there is a tendency to frequent taking cold. He is worse from changes in the weather. Chlorosis. Aversion to bathing. Many symptoms come on after coition. He may be a sexual debauchÃ(c). Many symptoms come on from fasting, and he is generally ameliorated after eating. He is aggravated from any physical exertion. His muscles are flabby, and he is losing flesh. He is disturbed by butter, cold drinks, cold food, fats, fruit, MILK, sour things and vinegar. Formication externally and internally. There is great physical irritability, and later a marked Iack of reaction. Many symptoms are aggravated from a jar, or stepping. There is marked lassitude in the morning in hot weather. Constant desire to lie down. Prolonged weakness from loss of fluids. Lying on left side aggravates many symptoms. Worse before and after menses. During menses the symptoms are aggravated afternoon and evening. Numbness in single parts. Orgasm of blood. Stitching, tearing pains, aggravated during a thunderstorm. Pulsation all over the body. Sensation as though a shot was forced through the arteries is a verified symptom. Oversensitive in general, and to pain. Shocks through the body, in night while awake. Sitting aggravates. General aggravation during a thunderstorm. Tension in muscles and tendons. Trembling in thunderstorm. Twitching of muscles. Nervous and paralytic weakness aggravated in morning, and after exertion. The body smells sour (like Hepar, Sulph., Lyc.).
Anger over trifles, and complaints from vexation. Anxiety evening and night; in bed; before midnight; after eating; with fear; during fever; about the future; about his health; on waking. Complaints from bad news. Aversion to company. Concentration difficult. Confusion of mind in the morning; in the evening; after eating; from mental exertion; on waking. Delusions, frightful; thinks he sees dead people; images; thinks he is going to have typhoid fever; that he hears footsteps in the next room. Discontended, discouraged, and easily distracted. Dullness of mind while reading. Mental exertion brings on many complaints. He is very excitable. Fear at night; of impending disease; that something will happen; of misfortune; on waking. Fears bad news. Forgetful. Easily frightened, and heedless. She is hysterical, and in a hurry. No one works fast enough to suit him. Sometimes his ideas are abundant, and again deficient, and his mind grows sluggish. Impatience. He is indifferent to everything, even to his family. A gradually increasing indolence; a dread of mental and physical work. Irritability; in the morning; during menses; about trifles. Memory weak. Times of mirthfulness. GREAT PROSTRATION OF MIND. Restless and anxious evening and night. Sadness in evening, after emission, during fever, and from music. He is extremely sensitive to music and noise and to his surroundings. He grows serious and silent, and sits by himself quite still for a long time. lie is easily startled, from fright, from noise, on falling asleep, and during sleep. Spells of stupefaction creep over him His friends call him suspicious. Indisposed to talk. His thoughts wander. He is growing timid and bashful. Weeps easily. Mental work becomes impossible and he seems to be approaching imbecility.
Vertigo in the morning; aggravated from mental exertion, while sitting and walking. Tendency to fall.
Congestion in the evening. Heat in head in evening, in forehead and vertex. Flushes of heat after sweat. Tension in the scalp. Eruptions on the head of golden yellow scabs; eczema on the forehead. Fullness in forehead; over the eyes; in the morning; aggravated by mental exertion. Heaviness of the head, and the hair falls out. Pain in the head, morning, afternoon, evening and night, aggravated binding up the hair; after eating; must lie down; aggravated from light; lying; before, during and after menses; MENTAL EXERTION; after sour milk; motion; motion of head; noise; rising from lying; in a room; sexual excesses; after sleep; after stooping; straining eyes; during a thunderstorm; while walking; warm room; ameliorated in open air; by pressure. The headaches are periodical, pulsating. Pain in fore head aggravated from MENTAL EXERTION; from motion; over eyes; in occiput; sides of head; temples; in vertex on waking in morning; in vertex and forehead. The pains are bursting, cutting in temples and sides of head; drawing in head and occiput; pressing with sour slimy vomiting; pressing in forehead, outward, over eyes; pressing in occiput, and sides of occiput; pressing in temples; pressing in vertex as if it would open. Stitching in head, in forehead, in sides of head, in temples. Stunning in head and forehead. Tearing in head. Perspiration of forehead. Pulsating in head, forehead, temples and vertex. Shocks in the head. Twitching. Uncovering the head brings on the symptoms.
Dryness of the eyes. Creamy yellow discharges. Heaviness of the lids. Inflammation of the eyes. Scrofulous ophthalmia, and granular lids. Itching and burning of the lids and margin of the lids. Burning lachrymation, must rub the eyes. Pain in the eyes when reading. Burning and cutting. Pressing during menses. Pain as though sand in eyes. Sore, bruised feeling when reading. Stitching pain in eyes. Paralysis of the optic nerve. Photophobia. Pupils dilated. One pupil dilated. Quivering of right eyelid while reading. Staring. Strabismus. Swollen lids. Yellow sclerotics. Colors before the eyes, dark. Halo around the light. Dim vision for distant objects. Foggy vision; blindness. Exertion of vision aggravates many symptoms. Flickering before the eyes morning on rising, at 5 P. M. Mist before the eyes aggravated in gaslight at 8 P. M. Myopia. Sparks before the eyes.
Eruption on the ears. Creamy yew on the ears. Fullness in ears. Heat and redness of one ear. Itching in the ears. Lobe of right ear burning and itching, must scratch it until it bleeds. Noises in ears, with vertigo, humming, ringing, roaring, rushing, singing, whizzing. Pain in ear. Aching in right meatus. Burning. Stitching in and behind ear. Tearing. Pulsation. Stopped sensation. The hearing is acute, acute for voices; impaired, lost.
The patient is subject to fluent coryza, and catarrh of the nose with thick yellow purulent discharge. Epistaxis on blowing the nose. Fullness at the root of the nose. The nose is obstructed with mucus and crusts, but the discharge is generally scanty. Offensive odors in the nose in the morning. Ozaena. Pricking in the left nostril brings tears to the eyes. Smell is acute. Soreness in the left nostril. He picks the nose constantly and scales form. Frequent sneezing. Tension over the root of the nose.
Discoloration of the face, bluish; circles around the eyes ; earthy, PALE; red blotches but not feverish; red alternating with paleness; yellow, liver spots, white about nose and mouth. Eruptions on the face, on the chin, forehead, lips, about the mouth, ON THE NOSE. Pimples on the forehead. Pustules on the face. Heat in the evening, during chill. The face burns. Itching of the face and nose. Pain in the face, burning, neuralgic. Shooting in the right cheek. Soreness in the right lower jaw at angle, darting through it. Stitching. Swelling of the glands of the lower jaw. Swelling of the sub-maxillary gland.
Bleeding gums. The tongue is coated yellow. Yellow at the base, or dirty white. Roof of mouth coated golden yellow or creamy. Dryness of mouth and tongue. Salivation. Sensation of a hair on the tongue, followed by prickly numbness of whole mouth. Speech difficult. Stinging on the tongue. Taste bad on waking, bitter, metallic, saltish, sour. Vesicles in mouth and on tongue. Caries of the teeth. Grinding the teeth during sleep in children. Looseness of the teeth. Pain in the teeth, at night, ameliorated by pressure and external warmth. Burning, pressing and pulsating.
Throat and tonsils coated yellow. Dryness of the throat. Mucus forms in throat, Tough clear white mucus in posterior nares. Thick yellow mucus drops from posterior nares, aggravated at night, must sit up to clear the throat. Sensation of a lump in throat. Much hawking. Inflammation of throat. Pain in throat on swallowing. Sore throat on right side, aggravated swallowing. Burning, picking, stitching. Pulsation in left tonsil. Scraping mucus from posterior nares. Swallows liquids better than solids in sore throat.
The appetite is increased, ravenous or wanting. Aversion to food, to meat, to milk, to bread and butter. Desires alcoholic drinks, beer, pungent food, eggs, fried fish, cold drinks. The stomach is disordered by fat and milk. Emptiness, aggravated after eating. Eructation after eating, empty, SOUR; waterbrash. Fullness after eating. Heartburn, heaviness and pressure. Heat in the stomach. Nausea in the morning, evening, during cough, and during headache. Pain in the stomach; after eating; two hours after eating; cramping; gastralgia, several attacks every day with vomiting sour fluids; over-secretion of lactic acid. Gnawing in the stomach. Pressing after eating. Soreness and stitching. Retching. Extreme thirst. Ulceration of the stomach. Sour vomiting. Creamy coating on the tongue. Sour odor of the body. Vomiting on coughing, with headache, of bile, bitter, frothy with headache, of mucus, SOUR in infants fed on milk, sour cheesy masses in intermittent fever ; in pregnancy; vomiting yellow, green.
Distension of the abdomen after eating. Sensation of emptiness, after stool. Flatulence, obstinate, after eating. Fullness, gurgling and hardness. Pain afternoon and night, after eating, paroxysmal, before stool. Pain in hypochondria. Burning in abdomen. Cramping before stool, causing urging to stool, while walking. Cutting in abdomen. Pressing in the hypogastrium. Soreness in the whole abdomen. Stitching in the abdomen and in liver. Torpid liver. Rumbling. Tension.
Constipation with difficult hard stool. Inactivity of the rectum; one day constipated, next day diarrhoea. Diarrhoea morning, night, with colic, after eating, in summer, with flatus. The anus is excoriated; much flatus; involuntary stools, involuntary when passing flatus. Sore, itching anus, aggravated in the warmth of the bed. Pain in the rectum after stool. Burning during and after stool. Painful contraction of anus. Cutting during stool. Stitching on walking. Tenesmus. Urging to stool after coition, in a man. Urging ineffectual, unsatisfactory. Weak feeling in the rectum before stool. The stool is bloody, cheesy, crumbling; light colored, bileless stool; green; jelly-like masses; pasty; sour-smelling stools; thin yellowish brown stool; watery; yellowish green; yellowish brown. Worms with the stool.
Paralysis of the bladder. Pressing pain in the bladder before urination. Urging to urinate at night, after coition (man) ; after eating; constant; frequent. Dysuria. Urination frequent, at night, during perspiration, involuntary, night, during sleep. Must wait for urine to start. Must press a long time before urine starts. Unsatisfactory. urination. Stitching pain in the kidneys. Emission of prostatic fluid during stool. Enlarged prostate. Burning in the urethra during the flow of urine. After stool burning and itching of the meatus. The urine is albuminous, burning, cloudy, dark, pale, copious night and morning, offensive, scanty, with mucous sediment.
Erections are troublesome morning and night, continued, frequent, incomplete, painful, without desire, violent, wanting. Vesicles upon the genitalia. Itching of the scrotum, prepuce and anus. Pain in the spermatic cords and testes. Drawing in spermatic cords. Pressing in testes. Seminal emission after coition, without dreams, without erections, frequent, unconscious. Sexual passion diminished, or increased, without erection, vomiting. Swelling of penis and testes.
Desire increased in the female. Leucorrhoea after menses, acrid, copious, creamy, honey colored, sour smelling, yellow and watery. Menses absent, copious, too frequent, late, pale, painful, protracted. Prolapsus of the uterus with a weak sinking feeling after stool. Sterility. Soreness in trachea. Hoarseness and loss of voice. Respiration is asthmatic, difficult, short and sighing.
Cough afternoon, evening in bed, night, during chill, constant, with coryza, after drinking. Dry evening cough with expectoration in the morning. Hacking, hollow, short, racking cough, with irritation in chest or larynx. Loose morning cough. Tickling in larynx and chest. Violent cough. Cough aggravated while sitting. Expectoration in the morning, bloody, greenish, mucous, offensive, purulent, thick, viscid, yellow; tasting flat, putrid, salty.
Anxiety in the chest; a bubble starts from the heart and passes through the arteries. Constriction of the chest. Empty sensation in the chest after eating. Pimples on the chest. Sudden feeling of fullness in the upper part of the chest. Oppression of the chest. Pain in the chest after dinner, from deep breathing, during cough. Pain in the heart. Aching, pressing in the chest. Burning deep in the chest, aggravated, on the right side, evening in bed. Cutting, pressing. Rawness in chest on coughing. Soreness in chest. Stitching in the chest, sides of chest, aggravated in left side. PALPILATION, anxious, after eating; aggravated from noise, lying on the left side, during a thunderstorm, Phthisis florida in young people. Trembling of heart, after menses, on ascending stairs.
Heavy dragging in the back. Itching of the skin of the back. Pain in the back at night, during menses, on motion, from sexual excesses, while sing. Pain in the dorsal region; left scapula, between scapulae. Pain in lumbar region, during menses. Pain in sacrum, during menses. Aching in back during menses in lumbar region. Sore bruised back and spine. Spinal irritation. Burning in lumbar region and in the spine. Drawing in the back. Sharp pain in right sacroiliac junction. Stitching in lumbar region.
Perspiration of the back. Stiffness both sides of neck. Swelling of the glands of the neck. Weakness of the back toward evening, in the lumbar region, after emissions.
COLD HANDS, legs and feet. Feet icy cold during menses, in daytime, burn at night in bed. Contraction of extensors in forearm while writing. Sore stinging corns. Cramp in calves and feet. Cramp in hands, while writing. Cracking in joints. Eruption on limbs, vesicles ; pimples and vesicles on lower limbs ; pimples on nates, eczema of ankles. Formication of upper limbs and of feet. Heat of hands and feet. Heaviness of limbs, of lower limbs, legs and feet. Itching of limbs, upper limbs, lower limbs, ankles. Numbness of limbs, upper limbs, right hand and arm, of fingers, right fingers, of feet. Pain in the limbs. Gouty, rheumatic joints, wrist. Rheumatic pain in shoulder (right). Pain in leg, calf, ankle, ball of foot, first toe. Bruised pain in limbs, lower limbs, knee, leg. Burning hands and soles. Crampy pain in left hand and index finger. Drawing in forearm, wrist during menses, hand, joints, left shoulder, hip and knee. Pressure in shoulder. Stitching in shoulder and fingers, in hip, thigh, knee, soles, heel. Tearing in limbs, joints, upper limbs, shoulder, upper arm, elbow, fingers; lower limbs, hip, knee, leg, foot, toes. Perspiration of hands and feet. Restless legs. Shortening of tendons in hollow of knee, also after menses. Stiffness of joints. Swelling of fingers; of lower limbs, of feet. Tension in hamstrings and calf. Trembling in hands, in knees after emissions. Twitching of muscles. Weakness of upper limbs, of hands, of right wrist and left ankle after menses; of lower limbs, thighs, ANKLES. Weakness of ankles in children (Nat. c.). Sudden giving way of legs while walling.
Very deep sleep. The patient is a great dreamer. Dreams anxious, amorous, of dead people, distressing, of previous events, of fire, frightful, nightmare, pleasant, vexatious and vivid. Falling asleep in the chair. The sleep is restless. Sleepiness all day and after dinner, most in forenoon. Sleepless before midnight, after midnight, from crowding of thoughts. Sleepiness, yet cannot sleep. Unrefreshing sleep. Wakeful from 12 to 3 A. at. Waking early, 5 A. M., unrested. Waking late.
Coldness in evening in bed, in cold air. Chilliness in evening, during menses, after eating. Shaking chill. One-sided coldness. Internal chill. Fever, flushes of heat and headache every afternoon Cannot get to sleep, feels so hot. Fever with sweat during sleep. Intermittent fever with vomiting of sour masses Perspiration in the daytime, in afternoon, during the night. Anxious sweat. Cold sweat Perspiration on coughing, on slight exertion. Profuse sweat in the morning and during the night with great nervous weakness. Sour-smelling sweat. The infant smells sour.
Biting, burning or coldness of the skill. Liver spots; red spots, yellow spots and jaundiced skin. Dry skin. Dry, burning eruptions; blisters, boils, burning, desquamating, moist, dry, herpetic, painful, phagedenic, pimples, golden yellow scales; suppurating, urticaria, vesicular. Eczema with honey colored discharge. Erysipelas. Excoriation. Formication. Freckles. Gnawing pain in skin. Inactivity of the skin. Itching, biting, burning, crawling, creeping, stinging, ameliorated by scratching, aggravated by warmth of bed. Sensitive skin. Sore feeling in the skin. Sticking in skin. Swelling of skin, of affected parts. Dropsical skin. Ulcerative pain. Ulcers; biting, burning, crawling, deep; discharge offensive and yellow; fistulous, inflamed, red areola, sensitive, stinging, suppurating, swollen, unhealthy. Unhealthy skin. Warts.
NATRUM SULPHURICUM
This is one of our most frequently indicated constitutional remedies. The symptoms appear in the morning, evening and during the night, especially before midnight. Some symptoms are better after breakfast, during the daytime and after midnight, except the sweat. It is a very useful remedy for complaints following neglected gonorrhoea. The symptoms and the constitutional state of the patient are worse in wet weather. It is useful in patients who live near waterways and have suffered long from malarial influences. It is useful as an antidote to the abuse of quinine. It especially belongs to patients of the neuropathic and bilious constitution. He is extremely sensitive to the night air. He suffers from universal catarrh and the discharges are generally greenish. It cures dropsical conditions. Sensitive to touch and pressure; oversensitive mentally and physically. Very sensitive to pain. The pains are very numerous; dull pains, sharp pains, all better from motion. Bruised feeling all over. Strong desire for open air and better while walking in the open air. Sensitive to a warm room, though he is sometimes sensitive to cold and must have warm clothing. The feeling of fullness or distension is found in many Places; in the head, in the ear, in the abdomen, in the veins generally. Complaints all worse in the spring and in warn weather. General physical restlessness and anxiety. Marked weakness and trembling with internal pulsations and rapid heart. Twitching of muscles. Complaints from injuries of head and spine. The symptoms all worse during rest. Rheumatic complaints all over the body. He is compelled to lie on the back. Convulsions from injuries of the head. Sycotic conditions with a history of warts and condylomata. Anxiety in the morning which passes off after breakfast; in the evening in bed; at night before midnight; during fever; about the future; anxiety and loathing of life with suicidal impulse, must use all self-control to prevent taking his life. A woman during gestation attempted several times to hang herself, after this remedy she was cheerful and there was no return of the suicidal disposition. Cheerful after stool. Music makes her sad. Sadness in the morning, which passes off after breakfast. Extremely irritable in the morning. Violent anger which is followed by jaundice. Aversion to company. Dislikes to speak or to be spoken to. Dullness of mind and excitability. Mental exertion brings on mental symptoms. Mental troubles come on from injuries of the head. A young man became very sad and subject to attacks of vertigo, and neglected his business after being hit on the side of the head by a baseball. He was entirely free from all symptoms after taking this remedy. Fear of a crowd; of evil; of people. Forgetful, easily frightened, hysterical; indifferent; indolent; insanity. She is oversensitive and suspicious. Starting from fright or noise and in sleep. Subject to vertigo, congestive headaches with fullness and heat. Pressing outward in the head with pulsation. Periodical headaches with vomiting bile. The pains are worse when thinking of them and better by pressure, in the open air and when lying. Pulsation in the temples when walking. Splitting pain in the vertex. Heat of the vertex. Headache in the morning on waking. Mental exertion brings on headaches. Sensation as of brain falling to side lain on. Headache with intermittent fever. Violent occipital headache with pain in the nape of the neck. Headache from injuries of the head. Itching of the scalp. Formication. Eczema of the scalp with much moisture.
Photophobia and head complaints from looking into the light. Lachrymation and dim vision, jaundiced eyes; inflamed eyes with many blisters. Burning in the eyes morning and evening. Greenish discharge from the eyes. Lids stuck together in the morning. Granular lids. Scrofulous inflammation of the conjunctiva. Redness, swelling and burning of the margins of the lids. Heaviness of lids. Pressing in eyes when using eyes. Itching of the eyes in the morning.
Chirping in the ears in the evening; during chill and fever. Flapping sensation in the ears. Ringing in the ears. Pressing out feeling in the ears. Earache as if something was forcing its way out. Stitching pains in ears, worse entering warm room from cold air; in damp weather. Earache. Complaint worse on right side. Heat in right ear in evening. Catarrh of right ear. Stopped sensation in right ear. Purulent discharge from the ears.
Catarrhal discharge from nose, yellowish green. Epistaxis before and during menses; in afternoon and evening. Dryness and burning in the nose. Obstructed with mucus in the night. Mucus drawn from posterior nares tasting salty. Sneezing with fluent coryza and influenza. Epidemic influenza. Chunks of dried mucus blown from high up in nose. Itching of the face with eczema. Sickly expression and jaundiced skin. Vesicles and pimples on the face. Vesicles on the lower lip and around the mouth. Pimples on the chin burning on touch.
The teeth become loose and fall out in sycotic constitution. The gums separate from the teeth. Pain in the teeth worse from warm things, better from cold drinks and the cold air. Gums red, ulcerate and burn. Blisters on the gums. The mouth is always slimy. Much mucus forms in the mouth and throat. Taste is bitter and tongue is heavily coated a dirty greenish brown. Blisters on the tongue and roof of the mouth. Burning in the roof of the mouth during menses. Numbness in the mouth. Salivation.
Chronic inflammation of the throat with copious viscid white mucus. Dry sensation in throat. Pain in throat on swallowing food. Choking feeling in the throat when walking. It is often needed in goitre. Great thirst in the evening; for very cold drinks; during chill and fever. Aversion to bread and meat. Qualmishness after farinaceous foods; hiccough after. bread in evening. Eructations of sour water; of bitter fluid. Nausea before breakfast. Constant nausea. Vomiting of sour or bitter fluid. Vomiting of green bile with colic. The stomach feels distended and heavy. Pulsation in the stomach after breakfast. Extreme cases of gastric, weakness with acidity. Can digest only the simpler foods. Digestion very slow. This remedy has cured many _complaints of the liver; congested, enlarged, sore liver. Pain in the liver from lying on the right side. Dragging in the right hypochondrium when lying on the left side (Mag. m., Card. m., Ptel.), soreness and itching in the liver when walking. Sharp pains in the liver on deep inspiration. The liver is disturbed by mental exertion and anger. The liver seems to manufacture an excess of bile. Perverted viscid bile that readily forms gall stones. It causes the liver to healthy bile which is the natural solvent of gall stones, when given in homoeopathic doses at long intervals. It has cured many cases of gall stone colic. It has removed gall stones in many cases. Sensitive to clothing over the hypochondria. The following three cases will testify:
CASE I. Woman, married, grown children. Aged 37. Headache followed by vomiting of bile for several years. Face purple. Heat ameliorates the pain. Pain begins in right eye, spreads over the forehead with a dragging feeling in back of head. Pain in sacrum extends to thighs, aggravated on right side. Nervous, easily startled, apprehensive. Intensely fastidious. Had gall stone colic three months ago. Cold feet. Headache at menstrual period for sixteen years. Menstrual flow thick, clotted, dark, lasts one day. Stool, light color when sick, darker when in better health. Must restrain herself or she will commit suicide. Slow pulse at times. Tired all the time. Condemned to an operation by the surgeon for gall stone. Fissured tongue. Natrum sulphuricum cured; the gall stones disappeared.
CASE 2. Man actively engaged in business, weight i8o pounds. Age 40. Pain in region of gall bladder. Gall stone colic. Came on after indigestion. Dull aching in that region. Must walk about the room, not ameliorated in any position. Only once has stool become light colored. Pain in region of kidneys also through pelvic region and legs with a cloudy condition of the urine; dribbling of few drops of urine after urination. Dull heavy pain in right side behind the lower ribs, continuous pain; pain extends up right side as far as nipple; stabbing pains in breast. Pain in duodenum aggravated after eating. Natrum sulph. cured. The patient is in perfect health.
CASE 3. Woman. Age 64. Diarrhoea; stool watery, sometimes chalky; enlarged liver; clawing feeling in gall bladder ; gall stone colic. Had been condemned by a surgeon to the operating table. Sinking spells after stool; cold spells; vertigo, stooping, lying or walking; spells of rapid beating of heart; mental depression; thirstless; temperature sub-normal; sensitive to jarring abdomen; flatulence and rumbling in abdomen; cold legs to knees; cold hands; much belching, aggravated after meals; sensitive to weather changes; nervous and sleepless before a storm; sore dragging feeling in the liver; bowels sluggish; slow digestion; heaviness of arms and legs; chilliness down the back; unable to lie on right side with comfort; urine copious; strong; late going to sleep. Natrum sulph. made a radical change in her condition and there are no more signs of gall stones.
Distress in the abdomen relieved by displacing flatus- Emptiness relieved by passing flatus and by eructations. Cramps and many pains from obstructed flatus. Pain -and distension in the ascending colon from flatus. Pain in the region of the caecum. It has cured many cases resembling the first stage of appendicitis. Pain and tenderness cases in the whole abdomen. Dull heavy pain from abdomen to back. Burning in the abdomen. Feeling in the abdomen as if a diarrhoea would come on, ameliorated by eructations and passing flatus. Distress in the abdomen that hurries him to stool but only flatus passes. Pain in the abdomen during menses. Cramp in the morning before breakfast. Pain in abdomen 4 to 8 P. M., and in evening. Constant distress in bowels and urging to stool. Fullness, rumbling, motions, gurgling with or without diarrhoea. Pain in right ascending colon when lying on the right side. Bilious colic with vomiting of bile. It has cured many cases of syphilis. It has cured enlarged abdominal glands. Morning diarrhoea with copious flatus soon after rising or soon after standing on the feet. Diarrhoea in wet weather. Stools gushing; copious; greenish; thin; very offensive; slimy, bloody; cramps in the abdomen before stool. Smarting in the anus during stool. Sometimes cheerful after stool. Often the diarrhoea is painless. Diarrhoea after farinaceous food; from vegetables; fruit; pastry; cold drinks; ice cream. Diarrhoea alternating with constipation. Diarrhoea with stools at any hour of the day or night, but especially morning and evening. It has cured many cases of chronic diarrhoea with stool involuntary and lienteric. Itching and crawling in the anus. Condylomata at the anus. It cured an ulceration in the rectum with copious bleeding in a lawyer who had long struggled with suicidal impulses. It has often cured bleeding piles.
It has cured parenchymatic inflammation of the kidneys following scarlet fever and from malarial influences. It has cured sugar in the urine and polyuria. It has cured brick dust sediment many times also where copious white sandy sediment was present. It has cured copious deposits of phosphates with copious jelly-like mucous sediment. Must rise often in the night to urinate. Burning during and after urination. Urine loaded with bile. Where these symptoms appear after neglected gonorrhoea.
In the male strong sexual desire and troublesome erections. Gonorrhoea when the discharge has a greenish yellow color and there is burning during and after urination. It has cured enlarged prostate many times. Condylomata, soft fleshy with greenish discharge. Oedema of the scrotum and prepuce. Itching of the penis and scrotum with burning after scratching.
The menstrual flow is copious, acrid and clotted. Leucorrhoea acrid, greenish, purulent, excoriating the parts. It has cured milk Ieg. Much thick, viscid white mucus forms in the larynx- and trachea. Dyspnoea on exertion and while waling; with sharp pain in left chest.
Stitching on deep breathing. Dyspnoea in damp weather. It is a most useful remedy in humid asthma in children of sycotic parents. Humid asthma with copious viscid mucus in every spell of hot weather. Chronic catarrh of the bronchial tubes.
Frequent attacks of paroxysmal cough from irritation in larynx ending in copious white, viscid expectorations. Expectoration bloody; greenish yellow; purulent; white; viscid. Oppression of the chest from damp evening air and in the morning on waking. Emptiness in the chest on inspiration. Soreness in the chest on coughing, better by holding the chest with the hands. Bronchitis and pneumonia are sometimes hard to cure in sycotic patients until they have received this remedy. Muco-purulent expectoration in old people. Eruptions on the chest every spring in sycotic patients. Swelling and suppuration in the axillary glands.
It has been the epidemic remedy in this country in cerebro-spinal meningitis, where the pain in the back of the head and neck was marked, "as the gnawing of a dog" and the head was drawn backward. Piercing pain between the scapulae in the evening while sitting. Tenderness of the spine. Sore pain in the small of the back and sacrum. Pain in the small of the back during the night compelling her to lie on the right side; it passes away in the morning after rising. Pain in the small of the back from retaining the urine. Itching of the back when undressing. Pain in the sacrum, cannot lie on either side.
Trembling, twitching and weakness in the limbs, twitching in hands and feet during sleep. Pains in the limbs during rest. Rheumatic pains in the limbs in wet weather. Cracking in the joints. Warts on the arms and hands. Pains in the limbs during chill and fever, better by motion and walking. Worse in the lower than in the upper limbs.
Weakness in the hands; flexors pain on grasping anything. Trembling in the hands in the morning on waking and when writing. The tendency to suppuration around the nails is a marked symptom in this remedy. Palms raw and sore and exude a watery fluid. It has cured bad cases of psoriasis of the palms. Fingers swollen and stiff. Panaritium, pain more bearable in the open air. Ulceration, pain under the nail and in the tips of the fingers.
Pain in the right hip joint on motion. Stitching in the left hip. Pain in the hip extending to the knee. Swelling in the left leg. Sciatica better in motion. Dull aching in the lower limbs during chill and fever, better when walking. Restlessness of the limbs at night in bed. Ulcers on outer side of thighs. Stiffness of knees. Weakness in lower limbs. Burning of feet and legs to the knees. Dry heat in feet at night. Oedema of the feet. Sharp pain in soles and-heels.
Drowsiness in the forenoon when reading. Frightful dreams. Chill from 6 to 9 P. M., with fever, then dry heat until 1 A. M., sweat absent. Chili with icy coldness and gooseflesh from 4 to 8 P. M. during menses. Shaking chills. Chilliness with fever in the evening from night air. Perspiration after midnight or toward morning. Fevers with vomiting bile. Remittent and intermittent fevers. It is a much neglected remedy in chronic intermittent fever.
Eczema with watery oozing. Water blisters. Yellow scales after breaking the vesicles. Jaundice. Intertrigo. Wart-like, red excres-censes all over the body. Red, knotty eruptions on head above the ears; on the forehead and left side of nape of neck; in the middle of chest. Itching when undressing.
NITRIC ACID
Great general weakness; feeble reaction; extreme sensitivity, and nervous trembling, are marked features in this remedy. Patients greatly broken by long suffering, pain and sickness, physical more than mental suffering, finally anaemia and emaciation are marked. Sensitive to cold; always chilly. Symptoms are aggravated from becoming cold, and in cold air. Always taking cold. The walls of blood vessels are relaxed and bleed easily; profuse dark blood. Pains as if flesh were torn from the bones and a sensation as though a splinter felt in inflamed parts, in ulcers and in nerves. Inflammation of the periosteum, in bone, and in the nerves. Syphilitic bone pains. Caries of bone, and exostoses. The margins of orifices bleed and grow warts. Old scars become painful in cold weather and when weather changes to cold; pains like splinters. Inflammation of glands after the abuse of mercury in syphilitic subjects. Prolonged suppuration in glands, with no tendency to repair, when there are sticking pains. The discharges are thin, bloody, offensive and excoriating; sometimes a dirty yellowish green. Suppuration where there is no tendency to repair. This is often the case when the patient is syphilitic and has been surcharged with mercury. For suppuration and ulceration in cancerous affections with bloody, watery, offensive discharges and sticking pains. It has often been observed that the patient requiring Nitric acid is more subject to diarrhoea than constipation. It has cured many complaints in patients who are never so comfortable as when riding in a carriage.
Twitching of muscles in all parts of the body. Many complaints are aggravated from a jar, and from noise. Even his pains are aggravated from noise. Nitric acid patients are often extremely sensitive to medicines, especially high potencies indeed, they prove every remedy-given too high. Fissures form in many places; canthi, corners of the mouth, about the anus; the skin cracks and all these have the splinter sensation. He finally becomes dropsical, especially in the extremities. Offensiveness is a marked condition of this patient, often putrid odors. The urine smells like that of a horse. Offensive leucorrhoea, offensive catarrh, and breath; foetid foot sweat. Strong odors from the body. Too much weight must not be given to the dark, swarthy complexion so often mentioned as the one most likely to need this remedy. Nitric acid will cure blondes as often as brunettes, if the symptoms agree.
Prostration of mind. Any effort to reflect on certain things causes the thoughts to vanish. A general indifference to all matters; tired of life; has no enjoyment in anything; aggravated before menses. Mental depression in the evening. Anxiety about his failing health, with fear of death. Anxiety after loss of sleep; vexation and sorrow. He is angered over his own mistakes. Anger with trembling. Obstinate and refuses to be comforted about his misfortune. He is weary of life but fears death. Excitable and weeps. Despair of recovery. Hopelessness. Easily startled, frightened. Starts from fright on falling asleep. Cannot comprehend what is said to him. The whole mental state is better when riding in a carriage. Suffers much from vertigo in the morning; must lie down.
His headaches are violent, aggravated from noise of wagons on the paved streets, but often ameliorated from riding in a carriage on a smooth, country road. The noise and jarring increase the pain. Pain as if in a vice from ear to ear. The biparietal syphilitic pain is often cured by this remedy. Pain as though the head were bound up. Painful drawing in head extending to eyes, with nausea. Stitching pains in the head. Hammering pain in the head. Pain in morning on waking, ameliorated after rising, aggravated by a jar, motion and noise, ameliorated riding in a carriage. Heat often ameliorates the head pains and cold aggravates. Wrapping up ameliorates. Pain as if constricted by a tape. Extreme sensitivity of the scalp and skull to combing the hair, and to the hat. The hair falls out in profusion, as in syphilis. Eruption on the scalp with sharp sticking pains as from splinters; moist, itching, offensive eruptions. Caries of bones of skull. Exostoses.
The eyes have lost their luster, the pupils are dilated, and there is diplopia. There is inflammation of the conjunctiva with acrid tears. Ulceration of the cornea with pricking pain. Iritis with stinging, stitching pain, aggravated at right and changing from warm to cold room or in cold air. Spots on the cornea- Intense photophobia, burning, pressure and sensation as though sand in the eyes. Ptosis. Swollen lids, which are hard and burn. Srmall warts on upper lids. Warts that bleed easily, with sensation of sticks.
Deafness, ameliorated when riding in a carriage or train. Catarrh of the Eustachian tubes. Pulsating in ears. Discharge from ear, foetid, brown, ichorous, purulent since scarlet fever. The auditory canal nearly closed. Swelling of glands about the ear. Caries of the mastoid.
Subject to coryza every winter; no sooner does he get over one cold than he has another. The nose is obstructed in the night during sleep. Sneezing in cold air, from every draft, must keep the room very warm. Bad smells in the nose, and the catarrh is offensive to others. Nosebleed mornings and nights. Nasal catarrh, acrid, watery at night, yellow, offensive, excoriating, bloody, brownish, thin since scarlet fever or in mercurio-syphilitic patients. The nose feels as if there were splinters in it. Large crusts from high up in nose. Green crusts blown out every morning. Ulceration high up in nose. Warts form in and about the nostrils. Red, scurfy tip of nose. Crusts form on the wings of the nose. Cracked nose.
Deep lines of suffering characterize the Nitric acid face. The face is pale, yellow, sallow and sunken. The eyes are sunken. Dark rings about the eyes, mouth and nose. The face is bloated. The lids are tumid in the morning. There are brown spots. Pigmented warty spots on the forehead. The right parotid is large. The skin feels drawn over the face. Crusts and pustules form on the face. Cracking in jaw when chewing. Corners of the mouth cracked, ulcerated and scabby. The lips raw and bleeding. Painful swelling of the submaxillary gland. The expression is anxious, haggard, sickly.
Pain in the teeth, tearing, aggravated from cold or warm things. Pulsating evening and night, after mercury. Caries of teeth. Teeth become yellow. Gums bleed easily, scorbutic, swollen.
The tongue is excoriated, sore, red, yellow, white and dry, fissured, with sore spots. Ulceration of tongue with viscid mucus in mouth. Inflammation of the tongue.
Ulcers in mouth, on tongue or in throat, white, or dark and dirty, putrid, phagedenic, syphilitic, with sticking pains as from splinters. Sore mouth with stinging, burning pain. Excoriated, red, swollen membrane. Foul cadaveric odor from the mouth. Saliva flows from the month so acrid that it excoriates the lips.
Confusion of the muscular action in throat causes food to stop in throat and choking. Difficult swallowing. Violent pain in throat, extending to ear on swallowing. Sticking in throat like a splinter
(Hepar, Nat. mur., Alum., Arg. n.) on swallowing. Viscid mucus in throat. Mucus drawn from posterior nares. Inflammation of throat, tonsils, uvula and soft palate. Uvula and tonsils edematous (Apis, Rhus t.). Great swelling of the throat and tonsils. Ulceration of tonsils. It has cured diphtheria where the splinter sensation was present, and the other symptoms agreed. Inflammation of the oesophagus.
Longing for fats, pungent things, herring, chalk, lime, earth; and aversion to bread and meat. Generally thirstless.
The stomach is disordered by milk. Food sours, and causes sour eructations and vomiting. Fats disagree. Nausea after eating, ameliorated by moving about or riding in a carriage. Vomiting bitter and sour, contents of stomach. Ulceration of stomach. Pain in cardiac opening of stomach on swallowing. Sticking pain in stomach. Catarrh of stomach. Weight after eating. Sensation of rawness in stomach after eating.
Chronic inflammation of liver. Clay-colored stools. Enormously enlarged liver. Pain in region of liver with jaundice. Stitching pain in liver. Enlarged spleen.
Cramping pain in abdomen. Violent pain in ilio-caecal region, sore and tender, aggravated from motion. Awakened at midnight with a crampy pain in abdomen; chilly; pain aggravated from motion. Rumbling in abdomen. Abdomen distended and tender. Great soreness in abdomen. Inflammation and suppuration of inguinal glands. The relaxed condition in weakly infant boys, that so much disposes to inguinal herina, is often overcome by Nitric acid and the henna cured (Lyc., Nux v.).
Broken down subjects who are disposed to suffer from frequent attacks of diarrhoea, or from constipation alternating with diarrhoea, often need this remedy when the urine smells strong like that of a horse, and he is pale and sickly, losing flesh and strength, subject to excoriation of orifices and excoriating catarrhs and ulcers. The stool is bloody, putrid, undigested, green, slimy, excoriating, sour, curdled if milk is used as a diet, black putrid blood. In dysentery. Cold changes of the weather bring on diarrhoea. Anus excoriated, burning, fissured, covered with warts. Membrane comes with the stool. Much pure blood with the stool not even clotted, very offensive. Ineffectual urging to stool. Sensation as if rectum were filled and he cannot expel it. Constipation, painful hard difficult stool. Drawing, cutting and pressing before stool; constant fruitless urging (Nux v.). During stool there is colic, tenesmus, spasmodic contraction of anus, unsatisfactory straining. Splinters in rectum. After stool there is still urging (Merc.), exhaustion; soreness of anus; cutting pain; burning and shooting in rectum; constriction of anus; great nervous excitement; palpitation. The pain keeps her in bed for hours after every stool. Itching and burning in anus. Constant acrid moisture about the anus. Periodical bleeding of rectum and pain in sacrum. Fissures of anus. Painful prolapsus of rectum. This has been a most useful remedy in fistula, fissures, condylomata, polypi, caruncles, cancer of the rectum and haemorrhoids when the symptoms agree. It has cured caruncles so sensitive that the patient would cry out when they were touched. Haemorrhoids that are exquisitely painful to touch and at stool; that bleed, external or internal, with burning and sticking during stool. Piles that ulcerate and discharge copiously of blood and pus. When piles are so painful that she breaks out in sweat, becomes anxious, and pulsates all over, on the slightest touch or at stool, this remedy has been useful (compare Paeonia and Staph.). Foetid moisture at the anus.
The male sexual organs are in a constant state of irritability. Sexual desire is increased and erections troublesome at night. Painful spasmodic erections at night; stitching pain in the urethra and chordee. It has been a useful remedy in gonorrhoea when the discharge is thin and bloody, later when it is greenish or yellow; burning and sticking on urination, and the urethra is swollen and very sore. It has cured condylomata which have the "splinter" sensation, and bleed easily, and extremely sensitive to touch. Condylomata on genitals and around the anus. Inflammation of the prostate gland with gonorrhoea, especially when the discharge becomes scanty from taking cold or from strong injections. It cures old cases of gleet when the urethra has pain in it like a splinter on touch or when urinating. Prolonged inflammation of the urethra with infiltration, making the urethra feel hard and nodular like a whip-cord (Arg. n.). Sore spots in the urethra, ulcers, with bloody pus, and the sensation of splinters. Itching in the urethra after gonorrhoea (Petr.). Pimples, vesicles, herpes and crusts on the prepuce. Small ulcers on the glans or prepuce. Spreading ulcers. The ulcers discharge a brown, bloody water, offensive.
Phagedenic ulcers (Ars., Aur. m. n., Caust., Merc. c.). Inflammation of the prepuce. Ulcers that destroy the franum. Inflamed and ulcerated parts have the splinter sensation and flow a bloody water. Paraphimosis and phimosis and great swelling. The hair falls off from the pubes.
The female is greatly troubled by the constant itching and burning and sexual desire. Excoriation of the parts from leucorrhoea and menstrual discharges. Every exertion brings on uterine haemorrhage (Calc.). The menstrual flow is dark and thick- Menses too soon and profuse, like bloody water. Uterine prolapsus. Many and extreme nervous sufferings come during the menstrual period; flatulence, bruised pain in limbs, pain down thighs, "splinter" under the finger and toe nails, palpitation, anxiety, trembling, neuralgic pains in any part. After the menses there comes a muddy, watery flow, lasting many days, and extreme excoriation of the parts. Thin, bloody, excoriating leucorrhoea at all times or at any time. The vagina is excoriated and condylomata grow upon the genitalia. Erectile tumors. Caruncles at the orifice of urethra, exquisitely sensitive to touch. The itching is aggravated by cold. The parts are fissured and bleed easily.
Many troubles culminate during menses and lactation. Lumps in the mammae. The nipples are fissured and tender, are excoriated and have "splinters." Tendency to abortion from general weakness and the ease with which a uterine haemorrhage may set in.
Hoarseness, and ulceration of the larynx. Voice lost. Laryngitis in old syphilitic subjects. Oppression of the chest, ameliorated by expectoration. Shortness of breath. Intermittent breathing.
The cough is aggravated in winter, yet aggravated in a warm room and from becoming warm. The cough is dry, barking, aggravated during the night, aggravated lying, aggravated before midnight; comes on during sleep. Cough with hectic fever and night sweats. Paroxysmal cough with retching, like whooping cough, violent, racking cough. Hard, prolonged coughing spells with difficult expectoration. The irritation to cough is like a tickling in the larynx. The expectoration is greenish, viscid or thin, dirty, watery, bloody mucus, or dark clotted blood. Loose cough in daytime, dry at night. Rattling in daytime, but no expectoration. Cough in broken-down constitutions, from liver and lung affections, in tubercular subjects. The sputum tastes bitter, sour or salty. It is offensive, even putrid. He is covered with sweat during efforts to expectorate. Stitching in the chest. In typhoid pneumonia, with rattling in the chest, inability to expectorate, or when he can expectorate the sputum is brown and bloody, and the urine smells like that of a horse. In tuberculosis with night sweats and haemoptysis. Palpitation from excitement, on ascending stairs. The pulse is rapid, irregular, and every fourth beat is missed.
Swelling of glands of neck and axilla. Stiff neck. Stitching pains in back and chest Burning spots in spine. Pain in back, nights, compelling him to lie on the abdomen. Sharp pains in back and limbs in tabes dorsalis. Sharp pains in back on coughing.
Rheumatic pains in limbs. Emaciation of upper arms, and thighs. Weakness of limbs. Dropsy of limbs. Crippled nails. Rheumatic pains in upper limbs. Stitching. Sticking pains in limbs in cold weather. Numbness of arms and hands. Copper colored spots on arms. Chilblains on hands and fingers. Cold, sweaty hands. Numerous large warts on back of hands. Herpes between the fingers. Vesicles on the tip of the thumb that open into ulcers, felons, distorted and discolored nails. Yellow curved nails, splintered sensation under nails. It is useful in wounds that inflame and have the "splinter" sensation. Tearing in the long bones of the lower limbs at night. The legs are weary and bruised. Pain in hip as if sprained. Sticking pains along the nerves as from splinters. Syphilitic nodes on the tibia with nightly pains. Chilblains on the feet and toes. Phagedenic blisters on the toes (Graph.). Extreme soreness of the tibia. Profuse, offensive sweat of feet. Shocks on going to sleep (Agar., Arg. in., Ars., Nat. in.). The pain comes during sleep. Starting in sleep. Anxious, unrefreshing sleep, with frightful dreams.
Nitric acid is a very useful remedy in fevers. The thirstlessness during all stages has often called attention to it. Cold hands and feet. Chronic intermittent in cachectic constitutions, copious night sweats, extreme weakness, with the characteristic odor of the urine, and bleeding from some part a dark blood, this remedy will act well.
OXALIC ACID
This remedy has been greatly neglected. It will cure many heart complaints that are treated with vague, crude, unproved remedies with indifferent results. The violent action upon the heart racks the whole system. Trembling, convulsions, loss of sensation; numbness of the body and limbs; blueness of the lower limbs, fingers and lips; paralysis of the limbs are symptoms showing how violently this remedy takes hold of the body, affecting the heart, spinal cord and brain. Symptoms are worse from exertion and motion. The patient is sensitive to cold air. Symptoms come on in paroxysms. Palpitation alternates with loss of voice. No remedy produces more violent pains; cutting, shooting, stitching, tearing pains in many parts; sores and bruises all over the body; burning in forehead, stomach, abdomen, throat, urethra, hands and feet; painful spots on the scalp, sore to touch, also in other places. The body is mottled in places. Complaints come on from eating sour fruits, such as strawberries, cranberries, apples, rhubarb, tomatoes, grapes; also from eating sugar and starchy foods. Wine and coffee disagree. The symptoms, and especially the pains, come on or are worse when thinking about them. At times there is great excitement and exhilaration again there is loss of memory and dejection; maniacal conduct; aversion to conversation.
Fainting during stool. There is marked hyperaemia of the brain and surging of blood from body to head; flashes of heat mount upward; he becomes dizzy and there is vanishing of sight. The head feels empty; dull aching in the head; in forehead and vertex; the brain burns; headache in spots; pressing pain in small spots; pressing pain behind ear; the headaches are worse from wine, lying, after sleep, and on rising and better after stool. Sore tender spots on the scalp. Type blurs when reading; vanishing of sight; small, especially linear objects seem larger and more distant; pain in eyes, especially the left; bleared eyes. Epistaxis with vanishing of sight. Face is pale and blue; sunken expression; heat in face; face covered with cold sweat; drawing pain with rigidity near the angle of .lower jaw first in left, then in right. Ulcers on gums; gums bleed and are painful in spots; sour taste in the mouth; tongue sore, red, dry, burning, swollen, with white coating; there is loss of taste; aphthae in the mouth; much thick mucus compels him to constantly clear the throat; swallowing is painful in the morning; pain in throat; chronic sore throat. Appetite increased; wanting, with loss of taste; thirst.
Pain in stomach better after eating; gnawing in stomach better after eating soup. After eating, eructations, nausea, pains at the navel, colic, rumbling in bowels, urging to stool, weakness. Sugar increases the pain in stomach; wine makes headache worse; coffee acts violently on the heart and causes diarrhoea; heartburn worse in the evening; eructation, sour, tasteless, after eating. Nausea and vomiting; nausea during pregnancy; thirst and colic after diarrhoea; nausea and cramp in calves after stool. Paroxysmal pains in abdomen in the night, relieved by passing flatus; burning in stomach and throat; extreme tenderness of stomach; inflammation of stomach and intestines; empty feeling relieved by eating. Cramping pains in abdomen. Burning in the abdomen. Stitching pains in abdomen and in the liver. Great pain in the region of the umbilicus, worse evening and night; worse from motion. Sore pains about the navel. The pains in abdomen come on or are worse when thinking of them. Obstructed flatus in the splenic flexure of the colon, causing pain in left hypochondrium. Stitching pains in liver, relieved by deep breathing.
Cramping pains in abdomen, worse at night with vomiting; worse from motion and from eating sugar. Chronic inflammation of the bowels. Extreme tenderness of the abdomen; chronic morning diarrhoea with cramping about the navel; tenesmus, renewed urging on lying down. Coffee brings on diarrhoea; stools watery; of mucus and blood; stools involuntary. The tenesmus during stool causes pain in head; constipation with difficult stool and the straining causes headache.
The renal region is painful and tender. Frequent urination; copious urine containing oxalate of lime; soreness of whole urinary tract; the urine causes soreness and burning of the urethra; when urinating there is pain in the glans penis; incontinence of urine in sleep; all the urinary symptoms are worse when thinking about them.
Tearing pains in the spermatic cords, worse from motion; marked tenderness in testes which become painful when walking. Strong sexual desire and erections when in bed; seminal emissions and sexual weakness; shooting pains along the spermatic cords. Loss of voice with cardiac complaints; palpitation alternating with loss of voice; larynx sore, raw, with tickling and clutching; mucus forms in the larynx when taking; must constantly dear the larynx when talking; white mucus in the larynx; hawk up thick yellow and white mucus.
In complaints of the heart there is most difficult breathing In feeble, nervous women there is paroxysmal breathing; violent rapid respiration with intervals of normal bathing; jerking ispiration and sudden, forced expiration in angina pectoris dyspnoea with constriction in the larynx that is very painful; with wheezing and oppression of chest worse thinking of it. Cardiac cough on slight exertion; choking feeling in larynx; tickling in larynx while walking in cold air.
Sharp, shooting pains in left lung, heart and left hypochondrium, with inability to breathe during perfect rest; soreness in chest; pain in middle of chest through to the back. Dullness in lower part of left lung.
Stitching, tearing pains behind the sternum going to shoulders and arms; worse on left side, with blueness of nails and lips; cold sweat; paralysis of lower limbs; spasmodic respiration (compare Latrodectus mactans). Violent palpitation in rheumatic subjects, worse when thinking about it. Pulse irregular, intermittent, fast; cold sweat, blue nails, great weakness. It cures many cardiac complaints; endocarditis, pericarditis, valvular insufficiency, etc. Fluttering heart.
Pain under point of scapula, between shoulders, extending downward to small of back; stitches in chest, extending to scapula; violent aching pain in back and down the thighs, relieved by change of position. This symptom is an exception as the pains are generally worse from motion. Benumbing pains in the small of back better after stool. Numbness, pricking, causing a cold sensation with weakness in spine; weakness in loins and hips extending to lower limbs; pains shoot up back to head. Cold chills in lower part of back followed by evening fever, coming every day. Motion brings on many pains in spine with much drawing in muscles of back; paralysis from inflammation of spinal cord; limbs stiff; paroxysms of dyspnoea.
Numbness in shoulders to finger tips; sharp lancinating pains in arms; right wrist feels sprained; pain in right meta-carpus and fleshy part of right thumb with heat and numbness; hands almost helpless; hands cold as if dead; fingers and nails blue in heart complaints; pains in the points of flexed fingers. Twitching of muscles of shoulder, arm and fingers. The legs are stiff, numb and weak; lower limbs cold, blue and paralyzed. Violent pains in lower limbs. Burning in feet and hands. Rheumatism of joints.
Frightening dreams; wakens with palpitation, cold sweat and pain in limbs; sleepy during day but distressing sleep at night; feels better after passing flatus. Violent pains in stomach keep him awake.
Chilliness; shaking chill, cold body. Heat from slight exertion; flashes of heat then cold sweat; shaking chill in evening followed by internal heat and external sweat, hands cold. Cold sweat of face, hands and feet.
PHOSPHORIC ACID
"Mental enfeeblement" is the thought that will come into the mind when considering what the Phosphoric acid patient says, does and looks. The mind seems tired. When questioned he answers slowly or does not speak, but only looks at the questioner. He is too tired to talk or even think. He says: "Don't talk to me; let me alone." This state is found in both acute and chronic diseases. He is so tired in mind, perfectly exhausted. In chronic diseases when brought on from Iong study; prolonged worry in business men; in feeble school girls, who become relaxed from very little effort. In acute diseases he, especially in typhoid fever, is averse to speaking or answering questions. He merely looks. Finally he rouses up and says: "Don't talk to me, I am so tired." He cannot think what he wishes to say, mot frame his answers to questions. Another cause is sexual excesses in young men, or in those guilty of secret vice. Weakness; lack of reaction; state of stupor, with impotency; mental prostration, and as if the spine had given out.
In every case we find the mental symptoms are the first to develop. The remedy runs from the mental to the physical, from the brain to the muscles. This is so striking that it is contrasted with Muriatic acid. In the latter remedy the muscular prostration comes first, and the mind seems clear until long after the muscles are prostrated. In Phosphoric acid the muscles seem strong after the mind has given out. The patient seems vigorous physically. He says he is all right physically, can work, can exercise even violently ; but the mind is tired, there is mental apathy, he cannot add up a column of figures, cannot read the newspaper and carry the trend of thought, cannot connect circumstances. He forgets the names of those in his family; a business man forgets the names of his clerks; he is in confusion. Yet he can exercise, can go out and walk; the weakness in the muscles will come later.
Phosphoric acid has also great physical weakness; so tired in the back; so tired in the muscles; so tired all over; a paralytic weakness. Later there is sexual impotence; aversion to coition; loss of sexual desire; no erections; penis becomes relaxed in the midst of an embrace and he cannot finish the act. (Nux v.)
Ailments from business cares; prolonged grief; young women suffering from unrequited affection, or from the loss of a loved one. Some suffer more intensely than others; some seem more philosophical. "Ailments from care, grief, sorrow, chagrin, homesickness or disappointed love; particularly with drowsiness; night sweats towards morning; emaciation." The patient pines and emaciates, grows weaker and weaker, withered in the face; night sweats; cold sweat down the back; cold sweats on the arms and hands more than on the feet; cold extremities; feeble circulation, feeble heart; catches cold on the slightest provocation and it settles in the chest; dry, hacking cough; catarrhal conditions of the chest; tuberculosis; pallor with gradually increasing weakness and emaciation.
During this weakness there is vertigo. Vertigo while lying in bed; seems like floating while lying in bed. Limbs seem to be lifted up while the head does not seem to move, as if the limbs were floating.
Congestive headaches; in school girls from slight exertion of the mind and use of the eyes. Periosteal pains; bones ache as if scraped; ameliorated by motion; when lying the pain shifts to side lain on.
Most of the complaints are ameliorated from keeping warm, from absolute quiet, from being alone at peace. There is aggravation of the complaints from exertion, mental or physical, from being talked to. Morning headaches. He must lie down with the headaches. Headache aggravated from being talked to. He is sensitive to cold weather. He is sensitive to a warm room.
In the headache the pain often begins in the back of the head and spreads to the top of the head; feels as if a crushing weight were on the top of the head; worse from motion, talking and light. "Pressure as from a weight in head from above downward." These headaches are associated with mental weakness, brain-fag; so tired and exhausted. Vertigo with ringing in the ears and glassy eyes.
Its use in low fevers must be studied. The complaints come on slowly, slow decline, slowly increasing prostration. Such appearances as are found in advanced typhoid. It has the prostration, tympanitic abdomen, dry, brown tongue, sordes on the teeth, gradually approaching unconsciousness; little thirst increasing to intense thirst with craving for much water during perspiration; wants to be let alone; looks at the questioner with glassy eyes as if slowly comprehending the question; pupils contracted or dilated; eyes sunken; hippocratic countenance; continued fever; bleeding from the nose, lungs, bowels; haemorrhage from any mucous membrane; sunken about the eyes; discolored lips, covered with sordes, becoming very black; prostration gradually increasing. From the beginning the mental state has been most marked, and finally comes the muscular weakness, which increases until the jaw drops and it seems that the patient must die of exhaustion. Such states of weakness may come on from haemorrhages (China was the routine remedy among the older homoeopaths). It checks the haemorrhage and causes a rally, prevents the dropsy. There is a state like anaemia; pale lips and tongue; face, hands and feet waxy.
Pains and aches all over the body, ameliorated from motion and worse from cold. The pains seem deep-seated, often along the nerves, but especially along the long bones, as if the bones were scraped; as if a rough instrument were dragged over the bones. The pains are commonly worse at night. Severe bone pains.
The stomach refuses to do its work. The food remains in the stomach and sours. Sour vomiting.. Old dyspeptics with brain-fag. Complaints from acid drinks, cold drinks and rich foods. Sinking sensation in the abdomen after a normal stool.
In most of the complaints of Phosphoric acid a marked feature is milky urine. Sometimes it is milky when passed; milky flakes in the urine. At times the male urethra seems to clog up and examination will show these little milk-like flakes. The urine becomes milky on standing, like flour, chalk or phosphate deposits stirred up in it.
In Phosphoric add there is often an amelioration of complaints by their ending in a diarrhoea. Copious, thin, watery stool. From the quantity it would seem that the patient would be exhausted. Child with copious, watery, stool in summer; so copious that the napkin seems of no use; the stool runs all over the mother's dress and on the floor forming great puddles; the stool is almost odorless, thin and watery, and the little one smiles as if nothing were the matter. The mother wonders where it all comes from, and yet the child seems well. The Phosphoric add diarrhoea often ameliorates many of the symptoms and the patient feels better. Chronic diarrhoea, copious, thin and watery, whitish gray, and the patient feels comfortable, free and happy. If the diarrhoea slacks up the patient is worse and on come symptoms of tuberculosis, weakness, prostration, brain-fag. Some patients say they are never comfortable unless they have diarrhoea. Podophyllum is the very opposite. Take the same child; the stool is very copious and runs all over the floor, the mother wonders where it all comes from, but the stool is so offensive, a horrible stench, and the patient looks as if dying; mouth and nose drawn, countenance hippocratic; almost unconscious. There is painless stool in both, but Phosphoric acid has not the great prostration. In Phosphoric acid the stool is whitish gray, like dirty white paint; in Podophyllum it is yellow. Gratiola has a similar state of prostration, but the fluid is green water; when seen it looks like light shining through a green glass; sometimes thicker, like green bile.
Abdomen much bloated, tympanitic; great soreness of the bowels as if in a typhoid state. "White or yellow, watery diarrhoea, chronic or acute, without pain or any marked debility or exhaustion." It is uncommon for the stool to be yellow when watery. It is yellow when it is mushy; when watery it is light colored, sometimes milky. When yellow it is like corn meal mush, pappy; as in the typhoid state, thin like thin mush. "Diarrhoea; not prostrating; after catching cold during heat of summer; watery; chronic; violent, bilious or mucous of twenty months' standing; has the appearance of an old man; from acids in young persons who grow too rapidly; after eating, undigested; greenish white; painless." When we have a diarrhoea from acids we sometimes find symptoms running to Phosphoric acid. In the diarrhoea from sour wine, such as claret, from acids, vinegar, lemons, be sure to study Antimonium crudum. This is a very string feature of that remedy Useful in cholera.
Male sexual organs. Sexual weakness, prolonged exhaustion, impotency; masturbators; nightly pollutions with great exhaustion. Prostatorrhoea; immediately after every erection discharge of prostatic fluid." Even when passing a soft stool the prostatic fluid is discharged.
Falling out of the hair is a striking feature; falling of the hair from the genitals, whiskers, eyebrows, head. It is closely related to Natrum mur. and Selenium in falling out of the hair. Selenium has falling out of the hair from the head, eyebrows and lashes, beard and genitals, from all over the body. Natrum mur. causes the hair to become very thin; during confinement the hair falls from the genitals.
Phosphoric acid produces a troublesome leucorrhoea; "yellow, mostly after menses, with itching; profuse, yellow; thin, acrid mucus; with chlorosis." It suits the woman who has been nursing her child a long time, or nursing twins, and who gives much milk. She becomes tired and weakly. Loss of fluids, blood; prolonged nursing, and weakness from such causes.
The tendency of the Phosphoric acid patient at the end of the brain fag and weakness is to run into chest troubles. If a diarrhoea comes on then the chest trouble is averted. Most awful results will ensue from the use of astringents, or any remedy that does not correspond to the patient, that will stop that diarrhoea. He goes into tuberculosis; difficult respiration; coughs and suffers in the chest, and the trouble culminates in structural changes in the lungs. The indications for Phosphoric acid are seldom found in the tissue changes, but they will be found in the early states of the patient, the nervous condition, the milky urine and the diarrhoea, which have existed a long time. Chest complaints are acute; typhoid pneumonia; low forms of fever ending in chest troubles; not unlike Phosphorus. Prolonged pneumonia with the mental symptoms, lack of reaction, infiltration at the end of pneumonia. Haemoptysis.
Prolonged fever ending in feeble heart, with palpitation and the mental symptoms. Palpitation during sexual excitement. Tendency to abscesses after a prolonged fever.
Limbs and joints become affected. Pain in the hip joint. Pains in the long bones between the joints, better by motion. Old gouty constitution. Tissues become weak. Red spots appear wherever the flesh is thin over the bones, and these spots become inflamed and form open ulcers. After fever, abscesses in the muscles, and state of molecular weakness about the ankles; over the tibia where the flesh is thin. Phosphoric acid has a special relation to the periosteum. Periostitis. Pains in the tibia at night. Bone feels as if scraped. Cold hands and hot feet. Ulcers on the legs with watery, offensive discharge.
Boils, abscesses, pustules and other moist eruptions. Suppurating eruptions; tissues become weak.
Nervous state; marked indifference; weak and trembling; fainting; great nervous exhaustion; hysterical affections. Creeping, tingling and crawling all over the body, especially where there is hair, as if in the roots of the hair; formication; especially in those debilitated from sexual excesses. "Formication over whole body." Sore spots in the spine; lame back. Backache.
"Itching between the fingers or in the bend of joints or on hands." Herpes; eczema; erysipelas. Large purple spots form on the skin, an extravasation of blood from the capillary veins; ecchymoses. Ulcers on the skin; carbuncles; warts; chillblains; wens; corns with stinging and burning, and parts become black ; feeble circulation in the skin. Skin withered, old and gray, and the patient emaciates.
PHYTOLACCA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This is a very imperfectly proved remedy, and it is only possible to present fragments of it. The mental symptoms have not been brought out, but the remedy has some striking features.
You will notice the resemblance of this drug to Mercury, and it is an antidote to Mercury. In those lingering mercurial bone pains, where the patient had been salivated; the pains come on at night from the warmth of the bed; the body aches; a chronic, sore, bruised state; soreness of the periosteum where the flesh is thin, over the tibia; joints; soreness of the muscles; drawing and cramping; drawing in the muscles of the back; backache, worse at night; worse from the warmth of the bed. The patient suffers from these symptoms in cold, damp weather, as in Mercury. Tendency to ulceration, hence its usefulness in syphilis; old, chronic, syphilitic ulcers; the patient has been salivated; had Mercury rubbed in; he became saturated with it, but it no longer helps. Ulcers in the throat; on the skin; on mucous membranes anywhere.
Spasmodic conditions; drawing in the muscles; this may extend to violent spasms; opisthotonos; sometimes the cervical region is affected and the head is drawn back; jerking and twitching of the muscles.
Phytolacca is a glandular remedy. The glands become inflamed and hard. It produces sore throats, with inflammation of the glands of the neck, particularly the submaxillary and parotid. Inflammation of the throat with the accumulation of thick, tenacious mucus; swelling of the tonsils, Low grade inflammation like erysipelas. The symptoms are aggravation at night, on cold days, in a cold room, and from the heat of the bed; so that there is a controversy between heat and cold.
It seems that the remedy centers in the mammary glands. Soreness and lumps in the breasts from each cold, damp spell; becomes chilled and a sore breast results; sore breast in connection with the menses; a nursing woman is exposed to the cold, the breast inflames and the milk become stringy; coagulated milk. This comes out in the proving, but poke root has been extensively used by cattle raisers when the cow's milk became thick and there were lumps in the bag, and when the condition was brought on from the cow standing out in the rain.
Almost any excitement centers in the mammary gland; fear or an accident; lumps form, pains, heat, swelling, tumefaction, even violent inflammation and suppuration. No other remedy in the Materia Medica centers so in the mammary gland. Mercury is similar; when the patient takes cold the glands become sore. If every tribulation makes the glands sore in a nursing woman, give her Phytolacca. When a mother says she has no milk, or that the milk is scanty, thick, unhealthy; dries up soon; Phytolacca becomes then a constitutional remedy if there are no contra-indicating symptoms. A bloody watery discharge which continued five years after weaning the infant was cured by Phyto. The breast is so sore that, when she nurses the child, she almost goes into spasms, with the pain extending down the back and limbs and all over the body.
Diphtheria. In certain epidemics; great tumefaction of the throat; swelling of the glands of the neck, parotid and submaxillary; aching in the bones; foetor from the mouth, with heavily coated tongue; great aching in the back; nose bleed; soreness of the muscles. Analogous to Mercurius; they are closely related in diphtheria. At times in diphtheria we can only obtain the foetor, loaded tongue, exudation, swollen glands and stiff neck. This looks like Mercurius of one of the Mercuries. The Protoiodide is right sided, and stays there or may go to the left side. The Biniodide goes from left to right. The Merc. cyanide has a thick, green membranous cast, extending from the nose to the throat. In Phytolacca we have many features of Mercury.
It has cured syphilitic nodes on the skull and shin bones. Many eruptions. "Squamous eruptions; pityriasis, psoriasis." "Ringworm." "Barber's itch." "Rash on body; measles; scarlet eruption all over body." It is not surprising Olaf it cures scarlatina, as it has this scarlet rash, the sore throat and glandular involvement
It has the ability to delay the formation of malignant growths, especially in the breast; glandular tumors that become hard and scirrhous. Until this remedy was known there was but one remedy for the old cicatrices in the mammary gland. Women who were confined years before, had abscesses of the breast which were poulticed and lanced had a cicatrix left, and now in the present confinement they have trouble; inflammation in the old cicatrices; ulceration which eats off the ideal glands or turns the ducts aside and twists them; high inflammation; throbbing and pain; milk bloody. Graphite was the old routine remedy, but Phytolacca is a better remedy and suits the general concomitants oftener. The symptoms usually found in an inflamed breast after confinement are: Aching in the back and bone pains; fever and shivering. Phytolacca has these and falls into the very nature of the case. Graphite: has it only in a limited way. If there is high fever; congestion to the head; throbbing carotids; much redness, and the redness radiates from the nipple, Belladonna is the remedy. When the entire gland is as heavy as a stone, and hard, and the patient is sensitive to motion and touch, Bryonia. Mercury when the general symptoms agree. Hepar and Silicea after suppuration is inevitable, especially when the only comfort is obtained from heat. Hepar when there is extreme pain and soreness, irritability and this relief from heat; it limits the extent of the suppuration and opens the part without pain.
The most distressing, lingering, inveterate, old catarrhs with destruction of the bones of the nose. "Total obstruction of the nose; when riding, must breathe through the mouth." "Coryza and cough, with redness of eyes and lachrymation; photophobia; feeling of sand in the eyes, with soreness and burning." "Syphilitic ozaena, with bloody, sanious discharge and disease of bone." "Noli me tangere and cancerous affections of nose."
It is somewhat like Graphite:, in that it seeks out fissures in, which to establish inflammation, induration and eruptions. Where the circulation is feeble it has the tendency to establish induration.
"Face sunken, pale, hippocratic; blue around eyes: yellowish complexion; looking blue and suffering." "Pains in bones of head and face at night." "Swelling around left ear and side of face like erysipelas; thence over scalp; very painful." "Lips averted and firm. Tetanus." "Ulcers on lips." "Parotid and submaxillary glands swollen." "Tongue thickly coated on back; coated yellow and dry." This is found in all acute complaints and is like Mercury. Phytolacca holds a reputation among the Eclectics, and in their results we see a shadow of its homoeopathic action. In Cincinnati they used three drops in a tumbler of water and gave it for ulcers in the mouth. It was a standard remedy with them and they made some homoeopathic cures. "Ulcerated sore mouth." Syphilitic ulcers find a curative remedy in Phytolacca; when the symptoms agree.
There are several pages in the Guiding Symptoms showing homoeopathic cures of the throat; diphtheria; sore throat; inflamed glands; aching bones worse at night; violent cases, with difficult swallowing, pains in the tonsils; enlarged tonsils; tendency to slough. Syphilitic and mercurial sore throats. The sore throats are often aggravated from warm drinks; he wants cool things; and there is an aggravation at night. Here is a summary: "Diphtheria; sick and dizzy when trying to sit up; frontal headache; pains shooting from throat into ears, especially on trying to swallow; face flushed; tongue much coated, protruded"; thickly coated at back, fiery red at tip; breath foetid; putrid; vomiting; difficulty of swallowing; tonsils swollen, covered with membrane, first upon left; three or four patches; tonsils, uvula and back part of throat covered with ash-colored exudation. Pain in the root of the tongue on putting out."
Old gout and rheumatism of the limbs; in acute rheumatism which is prolonged, worse at night, worse from the warmth of the bed, worse from warm applications. Gouty rheumatism; syphilitic cases; pains as if in the bones. "Sharp cutting pains in hip, drawing; legs drawn up; cannot touch floor." "Syphilitic or gonorrhoal sciatica, etc." "Ulcers and nodes on the legs."
A certain class of physicians used- to call Podophyllum "vegetable Mercury." Phytolacca ought to be called "vegetable Mercury" because it is so full of symptoms analogous to Mercury.
PICRIC ACID.
The weakness of body and mind is the first impression wrought upon the mind of the reader who goes carefully over this proving. It is progressive, passing from weariness to paralysis. The evidences of softening of brain and cord are strong. He soon becomes sensitive to heat and desires the cool air which ameliorates his head and bodily condition. Cold air and cold bathing are grateful to him. He is sensitive to wet weather. Numbness of many parts, trembling, lassitude, heaviness, must lie down, worse from least exertion are marked features. Loss of sleep, mental worry, mental labor, are the exciting causes of symptoms. Extreme indifference.
It is a typical brain-fag remedy with indifference and lack of willpower, aversion to talk, think, or perform any mental exertion. He is quickly prostrated from the least mental work, and it brings on many complaints, such as soreness and lameness, diarrhoea, burning along the spine, general weakness and heaviness of limbs and back. He loses all interest in things; becomes irritable from any mental exertion. In young school children we have a common use for this very valuable but neglected remedy. When the child begins to learn the alphabet headaches come, and return with every repeated effort, often with dilated pupils. After every examination at school come these violent headaches. A young man at school with the following symptoms was cured promptly: Student's headache, vertigo when remaining standing, heaviness in the head, epistaxis, dilated pupils, congestion of junctiva, inability to bear artificial light, loss of appetite, bitter taste in mouth, vomiting, jaundice. Vertigo from mental exertion, lameness from stooping, walking, ascending, from raising the head from the pillow, cannot sit up, soon nausea comes from it. It is often associated with the head pains. For headaches of students, teachers, professional men, and overworked business men, it is a most useful remedy. For headaches with great nervous weakness from grief and depressing emotions, it has been often overlooked. It has violent pain in vertex, forehead and occiput, extending down the spine with much heat. Congestive headaches. The head must be cool, it is worse from warm room, and wrapping up the head or body, and better from rest of mind and body.
The headaches often begin and increase with the day, and are better by sleep at night. The patient is wholly incapacitated in the daytime, but comfortable from rest and sleep during the night. Extreme prostration often comes with these headaches. Extreme sexual excitement often comes with the headache as with many of its "complaints," but it is not an essential concomitant.
The eye symptoms are due to loss of tone in the eye muscles of such as are suffering from brain fag. Looking, reading fine print and exertion of vision will bring on the headache and eye symptoms (Onosmodium). Sensation of sand in the eyes, smarting, acrid tears, sparks, fog before the eyes, near sighted, dim vision, objects confused, pupils dilated, severe pain over eyes. Thick mucus in eyes. The symptoms from the eye are worse from artificial light.
Small boils and pustules in external auditory canal. Eructations, abortive, sour. Nausea in the morning worse on rising and moving about. There is evidence of liver trouble, and the patient is jaundiced.
Rumbling in the abdomen, diarrhoea from mental exertion. Yellow, watery or thin faecal, oily stool; smarting after stool; stool like yellow cornmeal gruel. Great weakness after stool, in debilitated persons. Urine contains sugar and albumen. Urine of high specific gravity. Urine heavy with urates, uric acid, phosphates, and poor in sulphates. Dribbling after urination. Weakness of the bladder. Great waste of phosphates.
In the proving it turns the normal sexual sphere into lust, and salacity with violent erections, especially during the night It has many times cured these symptoms even when of long standing. Pain in occiput and spine, heaviness of limbs and sexual excitement. Where great restlessness of feet is present the Zincum picricum acts better. It cures impotency and spermatorrhoea when the mind is unable to control the lustful state.
Burning heat in the spine from mental or physical exertion. Weakness of the spine and heaviness of the limbs, especially the lower limbs. The back is so tired that he cannot sit up erect, he must slide down in the chair or lie down. He is relieved while lying. It has been very useful in myelitis, with the weak limbs and a sensation as if body and limbs were bandaged or constricted; also with anaesthesia of legs and as if he had on elastic stockings. In locomotor ataxia where there are tormenting erections and emissions as soon as he falls asleep. Many cases of spinal weakness have been cured by this remedy.
Weakness of the lower limbs with trembling, numbness and constriction. Formication and prickling as from needles. Marked coldness of the feet. Physical exertion greatly intensifies all these symptoms; after long rest he is ameliorated. Tired after least exertion in limbs and whole body, excessive lassitude. Great muscular weakness. Sleepiness in day-time and sleepless at night, especially after mental labor.
PLATINUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
The Platinum proving represents the woman's mind perverted. It is especially suited to hysterical women such as have undergone fright, prolonged excitement, or from disappointment, shock, or prolonged haemorrhages. She becomes arrogant and haughty. One of the most striking characteristics of this drug is pride and over-estimate of one's self. She imagines that she is of a high born family and that her friends and relatives are of lowly origin and look down upon them. Her acquaintances are inferior to herself. A strange thing about this remedy is that this imagination extends to the body. She imagines that her body is large and that the bodies of other people are smaller in comparison with her own. She is in a contemptuous mood, anxious and serious over matters that are not serious, irritable about trifling things, is moody and sulky over slight vexations, anxious, weeping. Palpitation, trembling in all limbs during every little excitement, fears death and loathes life. Fear is a very prominent feature in this remedy. Fears that something will happen, fears that her absent husband will never return to her, though he comes back regularly. Restless disposition, excitable, walking, moving about, and weeping.
The mental symptoms alternate with the physical symptoms. Strange illusions of fancy. Imagines that she does not belong to this state and becomes insane over religious matters, sits in the corner and broods and says nothing. Takes on insanity; becomes a sexual pervert, utters unchaste speech and trembles. Spasms will come on from vexation or anger. Whistles, sings, and dances. Talks constantly about fanciful things. She may go into melancholy or into mania. Any disturbance of her pride will bring on her symptoms. Sexual excitement will bring on her symptoms. The usual mental symptoms are intermingled with trembling of the limbs, sexual excitement. and numbness of various parts of the body and limbs. Compressing sensations, pressing pains, pressure of the limbs as if bandaged or constricted, tension of the skin of the limbs as if bandaged. These characteristic features prevail throughout the various regions of the body and modify many particulars. Sensation of numbness of the scalp with pressing pain in the head, boring, compression of the head. Tension of the scalp, cramplike constrictions of the scalp gradually increasing to violence, cramplike pains gradually increasing to violence. Squeezing sensation in the head. These pains may be in the temple, in the top of the head, or in the forehead. Again, there is crawling, creeping, numbness of the scalp. Sudden shocks in the head. There is no symptom in the head more persistent than numbness of the scalp, it prevails throughout all sensations and pains. All headaches gradually increase until they are severe. Violent neuralgia in the head with sensitiveness in hysterical persons. Sometimes numbness in the head is described as if the brain were numb. Headaches come on from chagrin, from fear, from vexation, from haemorrhages, and from sexual excitement.
Sparks before the eyes, spasms of the lids, and objects appear smaller than they really are. Sensation of coldness in the eyes, spasms, spasmodic trembling and twitching of the muscles of the eyes. Cramping pain in the ears, coldness in the ears, numbness of the external ears. The numbness of the ears extends to the face, nose and scalp. Platinum is a haemorrhagic remedy. Bleeding from various parts of the body and mucous membranes. The haemorrhages wherever observed are black clots with fluid. On examining the symptoms of the nose haemorrhage is observed. Black, coagulated blood from the nose. Oversensitive to smell. Violent crampy pains at the root of the nose with redness of the face.
Sensation of coldness of the face, numbness of the face, cramping, Pressing pains in the face. Neuralgia of the face. Coldness, crawling, numbness of the face. Numbness of the near bone. Tearing boring pain in the face.
Pulsating and digging through the lower jaw, especially the right side, together with numbness and coldness. The pains come gradually and go gradually. Sensation as if the tongue were scalded, crawling in the tongue. Loss of appetite on account of the depressed mood or at other times a ravenous appetite; hasty eating, eats everything around her. Much flatulence, fermentation in the stomach. Jerking of the muscles of the stomach and abdomen. Sensation as if the whole abdomen were tightly constricted or bandaged. Tension of the skin of the abdomen. Violent, cramping pains in the abdomen, drawing pains in the navel as if by a string, which causes a sensation of retraction of the abdomen. Pressing, bearing down pains in the abdomen. These pains are much like Plumbum and Platinum has been used as an antidote to Plumbum. Pressing, drawing pains from incarcerated flatus. The torpor of the intestinal canal is much like that which is found in Plumbum. Inveterate constipation, much flatus.
The stool is half digested and papescent or hard as if burnt, or may be scanty and very difficult, or may be glutinous and adherent to the anus like soft clay. Frequent urging to stool and inability to strain at stool, inveterate constipation and unsuccessful urging to stool. Pain in the abdomen after lead poisoning and colic after lead poisoning. Constipation in travellers. Prolonged efforts to pass a stool. Aching pains, burning pains and protrusion of haemorrhoids during stool. Burning in the rectum during stool. Itching, tickling, and tenesmus of the anus, especially in the evening. Extreme sexual erethism is found in both male and female. In the male there is great sexual erethism driving to secret vice. It has cured epilepsy arising from onanism. Sexual erethism is one of the most prominent features of Platinum in women. Unbearable sexual excitement and voluptuous crawling in the genitals. Such extreme sensitiveness of the external genitals that it is impossible for the woman to wear a napkin during menstruation. Such extreme sensitiveness of the vagina that it is impossible for the physician to make an examination with the index finger. It is not an inflammation but a hyperaesthesia. Increased sexual excitement in young girls, in hysterical girls. Violent sexual desire in married women with itching, tingling, and voluptuous sensations. Pain in the ovarian region, especially the left. It has cured sterility of long standing, especially sterility that is supposed to come from excessive sexual excitement. Burning, stitching pains in the ovaries. Inflammation of the ovaries coming with haemorrhage of the uterus, and during the menstrual period. It has cured ovarian tumors and cystic tumors. Inflammation of the uterus, bearing down, as in prolapsus Prolapsed uterus and dragging in the pelvis. Polypus of the
uterus and uterine haemorrhages. Copious menstrual flow. The flow is dark, even black, and dotted with much fluid blood. These nervous women constantly feel as if the menstrual flow was going to appear. The menstrual flow comes too early, is too profuse, and then generally of short duration. The haemorrhage is somewhat like the menstrual flow in old women. The menstrual periods sometimes return every fourteen days or the menstrual flow may be entirely absent. The vulva and vagina are extremely sensitive during coition, sometimes preventing the act. The woman suffers from albuminous leucorrhoea, mostly in the daytime without much sensation. There are many complaints of pregnancy, threatened abortion, exhausting haemorrhages, discharges of black clotted blood. During labor the contractions are interrupted by sensitiveness of the vagina and internal parts. It is impossible for the obstetrician to make the usual examination. Cramping in the limbs during parturition or profuse haemorrhage; hysterical convulsions, puerperal convulsions. After every mental exertion palpitation, trembling, numbness, quivering, and excitement in the limbs. Tremulous restlessness in the legs with numbness. Cold feet. Pains in the great toe as if bandaged. This sensation prevails throughout. The limbs feel as if bandaged about the thigh or leg. The nerves are in a great state of excitement most of the time. The patient is prostrated. Paralytic weakness, which is worse during rest. Numbness, stiffness and coldness. Painful tremulousness all over the body, with throbbing in the blood vessels. Numbness of the scalp, of the feet, of the hands, of the limbs. Shifting, neuralgic pains. Spasmodic affections of hysterical women. Spasms from sexual erethism. Coldness, crawling, and numbness of the skin especially during fever.
PODOPHYLLUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This remedy is seldom used except in acute affections, but it is a long acting and deep acting drug; it produces a powerful impression on the economy; it relates to the deep-seated miasms.
It affects profoundly the abdominal viscera. It shows its symptoms largely on the abdominal organs, the pelvic organs, and the liver. The abdomen seems to be the earliest seat of attack. It produces such an impression upon the stomach and intestinal canal that the healthy action is impaired, digestion and assimilation cease. Everything taken into the stomach becomes sour. The glands of the stomach are as if paralyzed; there is no digestion; this goes on until we have vomiting and diarrhoea. During this there is a wonderful disturbance in the abdomen; rumbling; gurgling as if animals were floundering about; clinically, as if fish were turning and tossing in a pond, as we have seen them before a storm. Rumbling and rolling. This is attended with severe, cramping pains doubling her up. Abdomen is sensitive; so sore she cannot endure pressure. The soreness extends to the stomach, intestines and finally to the liver. The whole abdominal viscera are sore, sensitive to pressure. After this comes a gurgling, watery stool, pouring out of the anus. A tremendous outpouring so that the patient wonders where all the fluid comes from, and soon it comes on again. Copious, enormous, and very frequent. This soreness, cramping, and rumbling precedes the stool, but sometimes it continues during the stool. Commonly the patient is relieved by the stool. There is much flatus and spluttering, but not so marked as in Aloe. The colic often comes and goes without stool. Painless stools, in which compare China which has stool coming on at night and after eating. Putrid or not, and of inky color. Podophyllum is rarely indicated when the discharge is not offensive. After a while the abdomen again becomes tumultuous, and this is again relieved by a stool. This process is repeated over and over. It seems as if the blood vessels would empty themselves into the abdominal cavity and then into the outer world. Not unlike cholera and cholera morbus, and these two are the common manifestations of disease for which this remedy is used in routine practice. The cholera morbus coming on in the latter part of the night, especially about 3, 4, or 5 o'clock, resembles Podophyllum. Tumultuous action of the bowels with rumbling, pain, and soreness, and the prostration is so marked that if not relieved in a day or two, it seems he must die. Rice-water stools, jelly-like on standing.
With this tumultuous action, she has an indescribable sensation; an all-gone feeling, a deathly sick feeling, described by some as an emptiness, as if fasting, yet averse to food. An awful, hungry, empty weakness, as if the whole intestines would drop out. No wonder they think so, because this remedy produces an astonishing amount of relaxation. Described by some as a sensation of dragging down. The uterine ligaments become relaxed and there is prolapsus. The rectum protrudes for inches. The sensation of dragging down as if all the parts would be pushed out into the world is a common feature. It seems to begin with the liver, as if all the parts were let down. Weakness attended with soreness.
Dragging down in the region of the ovary and the ovary is congested. The uterus is extremely sore and is enlarged; sore to touch so that light clothing aggravates. Sensitiveness of the abdomen in diarrhoea and vomiting; in cholera morbus; in women when menstruating. Indicated if there is a copious diarrhoea during the menstrual period, and great soreness in the uterus. Much pain in the ovaries, in one or both, extending down the crural region, down the front of the thigh. Pain in the ovaries, especially the right; pain in the ovaries during the menstrual period; griping pain in the bowels during the menstrual period. Great soreness of the abdomen before and during the menstrual period. (Apis, Cimicifuga, Vespa, Lachesis, but these are not so likely to have diarrhoea and, if so, it is not as copious.)
Alternating conditions is a feature of this remedy. If a Podophyllum patient takes cold, has any mental excitement, overexerts himself, eats boiled food, cabbage, fruits, and overloads his stomach with rich food he has a diarrhoea, and following this a constipation lasting for weeks, no stool except in lumps; difficult, scanty stool and as soon as he disorders his stomach again comes a diarrhoea. This alternating diarrhoea and constipation is a Podophyllum state rather than a chronic diarrhoea, which is a continued state found in many remedies. The diarrhoea is periodic, alternating with constipation.
Another alternating feature is the headache. Chronic headache, periodic headache, sick headache, congestive in character, as if all the blood were in the head, as if the head would burst, and the pains most violent in the back of the head, bursting, and then on comes a diarrhoea which relieves the head. Sometimes when the diarrhoeas lag up too suddenly, a headache is the result. It is a common feature after giving a high potency of Podophyllum in a diarrhoea, that a headache comes on after the diarrhoea is stopped. It means that the medicine has acted suddenly and the headache will pass away soon.
Headache alternating with liver disturbances. The patient lies on the side or abdomen. Rending pains towards the duodenum. You will wonder if it is not gall stone colic. Periodic, violent headaches; alternating diarrhoea and constipation; he strokes the region of the liver from behind forward and in this way gets relief, yet the liver is so sore that he can hardly bear the pressure. Liver sensitive to touch. Soreness about the liver; pain through to the back; dull aching pain, finally jaundice; becomes extremely yellow. Uneasiness and distress about two or three hours after eating, with jaundice; horrible nausea; aversion to food; empty all-gone feeling in the bowels. Vomiting, greenish, profuse, watery, vomits everything; vomiting of milk (Calc., the latter sometimes retains water); hunger after vomiting; deathly, overpowering nausea and prostration. Prolapse of rectum and anus during vomiting. (Mur. ac.) A condition commonly called duodenal catarrh; a chronic state; rouses into a Podophyllum diarrhoea every once in a while.
Mental symptoms troublesome. A torpid liver is often associated with a torpid fluctuating state of the mind; also a slow, sluggish pulse; palpitation. Great depression of spirits, melancholia, sadness, dejection; everything goes wrong; the clouds are very dark; there is no light; thinks he may die or that he is going to become ill; that his disease will become chronic; that he has organic disease of the heart and liver ; that he has sinned away his day of grace, and other such delusions. Mind easily fatigued; fidgety and restless; cannot sit still; whole body fidgety.
In this mental state with jaundice, all gone sensation, aversion to food, even the thought or smell of food; stuffed feeling and distension in the region of the liver. The tongue is covered with thick slime; pasty, yellow coating as if mustard were spread upon it; imprint of the teeth upon the tongue; breath foul. For such a condition the ancients gave Calomel.
Gallstone colic; enlargement of the liver; gastric weakness; unable to digest; duodenal catarrh; catarrh of intestines with copious diarrhoea. If you notice the Podophyllum discharge in the commode, you will see a great amount of water, on the bottom a sediment like cornmeal gruel; as if cornmeal had been stirred in. If you see it early it is yellow, muddy, or yellow-green, profuse, offensive, cadaverous; the odor penetrates the whole house; stool gushes away like water from a bung-hole; gurgling and much flatus. With the stool there is very commonly a prolapse of the rectum; a gush of watery stool and a prolapse of the rectum; a soft stool with great straining and a prolapse of the rectum.
Prolapsus of the uterus; prominent are Murex, Sepia, Natrum mur. Sepia is better sitting or lying; worse walking. Aversion to coition; hot rushes; constipation with sense of lump in the rectum, or better by stool. Murex has the following: The only relief is to press on the vulva; not better lying down; she then has pains in the back and hips compelling her to walk, yet this aggravates. Strong sexual desire. Pain in right ovary, which crosses entire body to left breast. Pain shooting up in the uterus.
The word bile is a striking feature in Podophyllum. You must connect the vomiting and the stool with this color. The patient declares he is "bilious;" his "liver is out of order;" bitter taste in the mouth; spitting tip bile and the color is yellow; in diarrhoea it is a green substance.
In children subject to copious diarrhoea, with prolapsus of the anus no other symptom Podophyllum often cures.
A feature of infancy is the following: Child may not have diarrhoea, may even be constipated, but it lies in bed and rolls the head in sleep. Bell. and Apis roll head. Apis lies on back with the head on its side. Chewing motion of the jaws; sometimes a sucking; a grinding of the teeth in those who are old and have teeth; rolling the head from side to side; if you lift the eyelids you will find a strabismus. Provers felt as if the eyes were drawn inward. It has cured such a strabismus in congestion of the brain following a suddenly suppressed diarrhoea.
A child who should have a colored stool has instead a white one like chalk (Calc. c.). In adults, a bileless, white stool.
The body is offensive; offensive sweat; compare Sepia, Merc., Aloe, Sulph., Murex, Nux.
PULSATILLA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
It is said to be a very good medicine for women, for blondes, especially for tearful blondes. It is one of the polychrests and one of the medicines most frequently used, as well as often abused.
The Pulsatilla patient is an interesting one, found in any household where there are plenty of young girls. She is tearful, plethoric, and generally has little credit for being sick from her appearances; yet she is most nervous, fidgety, changeable, easily led and easily persuaded. While she is mild, gentle and tearful, yet she is remarkably irritable, not in the sense of pugnacity, but easily irritated, extremely touchy, always feels slighted or fears she will be slighted; sensible to every social influence. Melancholia, sadness, weeping, despair, religious despair, fanatical; full of notions and whims; imaginative; extremely excitable. She imagines the company of the opposite sex a dangerous thing to cultivate, and that it is dangerous to do certain things well established in society as good for the human race. These imaginations belong to eating as well as thinking. They imagine that milk is not good to drink, so they will not take it. They imagine that certain articles of diet are not good for the human race. Aversion to marriage is a strong symptom. A man takes it into his head that it is an evil thing to have sexual intercourse with his wife and abstains from it. Religious freaks ; an especial tendency to dwell on religious notions; fixed ideas concerning the Scripture; he misuses and misapplies the Scriptures to his own detriment; dwells on sanctification until he becomes fanatical and insane; thinks he is in a wonderfully sanctimonious state of mind, or that he has sinned away his day of grace. This goes on until he becomes insane on other subjects, and then the tendency is to sit day after day in a taciturn way. He will not answer questions unless hard pressed, when all he will say is "Yes" or "No," or he will merely shake his head. Puerperal insanity in a woman who was mild, gentle and tearful, later sad and taciturn, and then she sits in her chair all day answering nothing or merely nodding her head for "Yes" or "No."
Many of the complaints are associated with weakness of the stomach and indigestion, or with menstrual disorders. Women who abort; various irregularities of the menstrual flow; false conception. The mental symptoms are often associated with the ovarian and uterine difficulties.
With such a mental state the general state of the body is worse in a warm room and relieved by motion. Tearful, sad and despondent, ameliorated walking in the open air, especially when it is crisp, cool, fresh and bright. Suffocation and an increase of the pains, and even chilliness in a warm room; a nervous chilliness when the patient perspires from the heat of a room. The inflammatory symptoms, neuralgias and rheumatisms are relieved by a cold, by eating and drinking cold things, by cold applications, or cold hands. Cold drink relieve, even though the patient is not thirsty. Cold foods are digested while hot foods make the body warm from which symptoms are worse. Ice cold water feels good going down the oesophagus, and is retained in the stomach, though there is no thirst.
Many symptoms worse after eating. It is often only a lump in the stomach, but the mental and nervous symptoms also are worse after eating. The stomach symptoms are worse in the morning, the mental symptoms worse in the evening. Aggravation from fats and rich foods. Complaints brought on by eating fat, pork, greasy things, cakes, pastries and rich things. The Pulsatilla stomach is slow to digest, Hours after eating there is a sense of fullness in the stomach, a lump in the stomach, ameliorated by slow walking in the open air. The patient is commonly relieved from slow motion in the open air, becomes frantic when trying to keep still, worse during rest, ameliorated by doing something, generally slow, moderate motion. This relief from motion and aggravation from rest, relief in the open air, and aggravation in a warm room give us a good summary of this beautiful remedy.
In Pulsatilla patients the skin feels feverish and hot, while the temperature of the body is normal. There is aggravation from much clothing; she wants to wear a thin dress even in moderately cold weather. Does not need to dress warmly. Much clothing and covering aggravate. Often he cannot wear flannels or woollen clothing because they irritate the skin, causing itching and eruptions like Sulphur, and this is not surprising, as Pulsatilla and Sulphur are antidotes. There is no remedy like Pulsatilla to antidote Sulphur when it has been used every Spring to "cleanse the blood." Some people use Sulphur until the skin becomes red, hot, easily irritated, and aggravated by clothing. Pulsatilla is the antidote. Old cases of psoriasis; little flat, brownish patches about the size of the thumb nail, which itch tremendously, in old Sulphur patients are cured by Pulsatilla A general feature of the skin is itching and burning, but a more marked Pulsatilla state is a Lachesis appearance of the skin. It is mottled, erysipelatous; spotted, purplish in spots; veins engorged; capillaries tumid; a vasomotor paralysis of the capillaries or veins producing a mottled appearance. Pulsatilla has an unusually venous constitution. The veins are engorged, in a state of stasis, hence there is over-heat of the skin. This unusual fullness, redness and purple aspect of the face is a false plethora. It often goes on to a puffiness and swelling, and especially at the menstrual periods. Considerable bloating of the face and eyes, bloating of the abdomen; feet puffed so that she cannot wear shoes, feet red and swollen at the menstrual period, ameliorated by the menstrual flow. Many women are late and are preparing for a week or ten days; face purple, red, puffed and bloated; abdomen distended; dyspnoea; and all this is relieved by the menstrual flow. She feels these symptoms perhaps one or two weep, and is relieved
by slow motion in the open air. Cannot breathe in a warm room; wants the windows open; chokes and suffocates in a warm bed at night. This increases until the menstrual flow starts. The stomach is so full and distended that she cannot eat. No appetite or desire for food.
With the engorgement of veins ulcers surrounded by varicose veins are common in this remedy. Ulcers bleed black blood which coagulates early; little black clots; bleeding is not copious; clots easily, dark, tarry, offensive. Ulcers bleed and ooze, discharge a bloody watery fluid or there is a very thick yellow or green flow.
This brings us to the catarrhal state. Wherever there is mucous membrane there is catarrh. The mucous membrane is covered with purple spots, dry spots; tumid, puffed, looks erysipelatous. Wherever there is inflammation of the mucous membrane it looks purple; a venous congestion. Thick, green, yellow catarrhal discharges are most characteristic. The catarrhal discharges are bland with the exception of that from the vagina, which is excoriating, causing rawness of the parts. From the eyes, ears, nose and chest there are thick, yellow, green, bland discharges, but there is thick yellow green excoriating leucorrhoea. Remember, however, that Pulsatilla has a bland leucorrhoea, in keeping with the general state. Discharges are often offensive, sometimes bloody, watery, but even then mingled with yellow green purulent fluid.
The Pulsatilla patient suffers from vertigo from affections of the eyes, ameliorated by wearing well-adjusted glasses; attended by nausea which is worse lying down, worse from motion, worse from the motion of the eyes, and ameliorated in a cold room, and by riding in a carriage in the cold air. As soon as she enters a room that is warm she has nausea, even to vomiting. Vertigo with vomiting after eating.
Pulsatilla has violent headaches. Headaches in school girls who are about to menstruate. Headache accompanying menstruation. Headache associated with suppressed menses, with menstrual disorders; not caused from them, but associated with them. Pains through the temples and sides of the head are common Pulsatilla headaches. Headaches before, during and after menstruation; but more commonly before, when there is a general state of congestion, stasis, and tumefaction of the veins, and amelioration of the headache when the menses set in if the flow is normal. It is common to have the head and nervous symptoms through the menses, because the flow is so scanty, often little more than a Leucorrhoea, and for a single day a little clot of dark blood. One-sided headaches and one-sided- corn plaints are peculiar to Pulsatilla. Perspiration on one side of head and face; fever on one side of the body; one side cool and normal and the other side hot. I remember a case of puerperal fever with sweat on one side of the body and dry heat on the other and confusion of other symptoms. Pulsatilla was given and the patient recovered.
The Pulsatilla headache is a throbbing congestive headache; much heat in the head, ameliorated by the application of cold, by external pressure, and sometimes by slow motion, aggravated by lying and sitting quiet, ameliorated by walking slowly in, the air; becomes worse towards evening and gradually increases through the evening and night, worse from the motion of the eyes and from stooping. The pains are often constricting, throbbing and congestive. Periodic sick headaches, with vomiting of sour food. Headache when he overeats. Though he likes ice cream, he has headache and congestion of the stomach after eating ice cream.
Eyes. Catarrhal symptoms. Pustules about the lids and over the ball; on the cornea. Inflammatory features. Thick, yellow-green pus. Granular lids. Continued formation of little pustules. Isolated granules on lids, grow out here and there in bunches as large as pin heads. Eyelids inflamed and bleed easily. Every time he catches cold it settles in the eyes and nose. Eyes red, inflamed and discharge. In infants catarrhal diseases of the eyes of a gonorrhoeal character; ophthalmia neonatorum. In early days the infant often needs the same constitutional remedy as the mother. Yellow green discharge from the eyes; eyes are ameliorated by washing in warm water, or tepid water; even cold water feels good to the eyes. The Sulphur patient is made worse by bathing; the eyes smart, burn and become increasingly red after washing in water. Pulsatilla causes a tendency to the formation of styes; recurrent styes; always having styes. Pustules, papules and little nodosites on the lids.
Prior to menstruation, in young girls especially, things get black before the eyes, like a gauze or a veil. Nervous manifestations, twitchings, spell of blindness and fainting. In the early stages of paralysis of the optic nerve Pulsatilla is a great remedy. The patient is always rubbing the eyes; whether or not there is mucus in the eyes it matters not; but it is a sensation of gauze before the eyes, ameliorated by rubbing. Pulsatilla has cured incipient cataract. Itching of the ryes, in keeping with the skin symptoms. Itching in the ears, nose, tickling in the throat, in the larynx.
In the ears we have the same catarrhal condition_ Thick, yellow, offensive, purulent, bland discharge; very foetid, sometimes bloody. Pulsatilla is commonly indicated in earache of children; when the child is, a gentle, fat, plump, vascular red-faced child always pitifully crying. If it is a case of earache in a nondescript child Pulsatilla will also prove to be a temporary remedy, co closely is it related to pain in the ear. Pains in the ears in the evening or in the night, ameliorated by walking slowly about the room. In Chamomilla you have a snapping and snarling child, never pleased, scolds the nurse and mother; ameliorated by walking about. The irritability decides for Chamomilla. You can detect a pitiful cry from a snarling mad cry. Both are ameliorated by motion, by being carried. Both want this and that and are never satisfied; they want amusement. But the Pulsatilla child when not amused has a pitiful cry and the Chamomilla child a snarling cry. You will want to caress the one and spank the other.
Ear troubles with a ruptured drum and no healing; otitis media. Abscess in the middle ear; inflammation of the middle ear; copious thick bloody discharge, then yellow-green. The case goes on night and day until rupture takes place. I have found this condition as an endemic, in which Marc., Hep., and Puls. were the most frequently indicated remedies. Ear troubles following eruptive diseases. Offensive catarrhal discharge dating back to scarlet fever or measles; badly treated and drugged patients. Inflammation and swelling of the external ear; erysipelatous purple conditions. Scabs on the tragus.
The patient is subject to repeated attacks of coryza, with sneezing and stuffing up of the nose; a febrile state; sometimes with chills, fever and sweat. Pains in the face through the nose. In the evening considerable watery discharge with sneezing; in the morning stuffing up of the nose with thick yellow-green discharge. Pulsatilla is suitable to chronic catarrhs, with thick yellow-green discharge which is bland; stuffing up of the nose; copious discharge; patient has a bad smell in the nose; smells various offensive things, sometimes like manure, but more commonly described as the offensiveness of a stinking catarrh. Large bloody, thick, yellow crusts accumulate in the nose, harden down and are blown out in the morning, accompanied . by thick yellow pus. In old lingering cases, loss of smell and taste. The mucous membrane is in a state of thickening and suppuration, with the formation of crusts and ulcers. Fullness high in the nose; stuffing up and fullness in the posterior nares. Hawks up thick yellow mucus in masses, with crusts in the morning, very often offensive to others. Many Pulsatilla patients in this catarrhal. state get relief from this horrible stench by blowing out great crusts. . Thick clinkers of dried-up pus or dried mucus and pus accumulate for several days and this terrible catarrhal smell comes on; but as soon as he blows out these clinkers the odor goes away and he has relief until they form again in a few days. The patient himself feels better in the open air, and worse in a warm room. He breathes better in the open air; feels stuffy in a warm room. But there are times when his nose stuffs up more in a warm room, when he sneezes more in a warm room.
The loss of smell is present in chronic and acute catarrhs. Much stuffing up of the nose occurring in the evening; he blows the nose easily and cleans it out during the day, but it stuffs up in the evening and he cannot clear it out. Remember that the mental symptoms are worse in the evening. He gets up in the morning with a stuffed up nose, but can clean it out; his mouth is foul, tongue coated, rancid taste, requires much brushing of his teeth and washing out of his mouth before he can take his breakfast. So you see the mouth and stomach symptoms are worse in the morning, the mental symptoms are worse in the evening and there is also a stuffing up of the nose in the evening. Compare this with the cough. There is a dry evening cough in Pulsatilla and a loose morning cough. Copious expectoration in the morning, but a dry, tight, constricted feeling in the chest in the evening. Stuffed up in the evening, making breathing difficult. To repeat, then, Pulsatilla is one of our sheet anchors in old catarrhs with loss of smell, thick yellow discharge, and amelioration in the open air; in the nervous, timid, yielding, with stuffing up of the nose at night and copious flow in the morning.
With the catarrhs and acute colds there is often bleeding of the nose, blowing blood from the nose; the crusts cling tight, and when blown out they are torn loose, and this causes bleeding; but the nose bleeds easily, subject to epistaxis. Nose-bleed during the menstrual period; nose-bleed before the menstrual period; nose-bleed with suppressed menses; bleeding dark, thick, clotted, almost black, venous blood. Especially do we find catarrhal subjects in women who have late, scanty, light colored menses; scarcely more than a leucorrhoea; if bloody, then only a little black stain or clot. Chlorotic patients who have their menses once every two or three months; chlorotic girls who are irregular, and are subject to these catarrhal states.
Pulsatilla is very useful in hay fever. The management of hay fever requires considerable study because you have to deal with the troublesome imaginations of the patient, he will refuse to let you study him; he wants the hay fever treated; he don't want the haemorrhoids, the thick skin on the soles of the feet, the pains in the sacrum, the diarrhoea which alternates with constipation, talked about or inquired into; these are always better when the bay fever is present. Sometimes he will tell you that he is always well except when he has hay fever. He may feel well, but it is impossible for him to be well; he has always had these complaints and he does not want you to bother with them. The hay fever will hardly ever reveal the indications for a remedy for the patient
Another individual has epilepsy, and if you expect to find in the fit the remedy that cures the patient you will be mistaken. When an acute mimicking manifestation of disease follows several times the same beaten track the details are hard to find. He does not know much about his hay fever. If you suggest several things he has them all. In nearly all these acute expressions you do not find in the exaggerated attack the symptoms that will lead you to the remedy. You will find these symptoms by getting the state of the patient before he was taken with hay fever. These primitive symptoms are of more importance. Sometimes it is important to know what region was affected before the nose was affected. At times you will find spinal symptoms; great soreness in the back relieved by lying on something hard. Few remedies have that. They do not tell you that at first but continue to dwell on the hay fever. In many nervous women the attack comes on with sneezing and watery discharge and then a copious, thick, yellowish-green discharge. These are the natural symptoms of hay fever, but in the "back" symptoms you see something.
In Pulsatilla the menstrual symptoms and the prolapsus come in. When the hay fever comes on, all the other symptoms are better, she feels nothing except the hay fever, however, all the symptoms interweave with each other. The Natrum mur. symptoms will be worse in the morning and until toward noon, while in Pulsatilla they are worse in the evening, the nose filling up with thick, yellowish-green, ropy mucus, and when the nose has been cleared, a dry, burning, smarting feeling remains; if the room is warm at night, she cannot sleep. Natrum snot% is a little like that in the smarting and inability to sleep at night in a warm room. In Natrum inur., too, the discharge may continue day and night. We have an acute class in which Pulsatilla is sometimes indicated copious watery discharge which ends in sneezing. In the beginning we will think of Carbo veg., Arsenic, Allium cepa, Euphrasia.
With Carbo veg. there is a watery discharge and the irritation extends into the chest, with hoarseness and rawness. In Allium cepa we have one group of symptoms that points to this remedy. Excoriating discharge from the nose and bland discharge from the eyes; in the larynx, sensation as if hooks were there, and sometimes this extends below the larynx; this always means Allium cepa; it is also worse in a warm room like Puls. The Euphrasia looks like Cepa, only the discharge from the eyes is copious, watery and burning the lachrymation burns the eyes and excoriates the cheeks; discharge from nose is bland like Pulsatilla; sometimes this goes into the chest, then it is no longer Euphrasia.
Iodine is worse in a warm room; thick discharge from nose which burns and excoriates and is yellowish-green; but there is one thug that differentiates it from all the others the patient immediately begins to emaciate when the complaint comes on and is very hungry.
Kali hydr. with the thick yellowish discharge, worse in a warm room, there is a great amount of rawness and burning in the nose; external nose very sore to pressure; sensitiveness in the root of the nose; whole face aches and patient is extremely restless; wants to walk in the open air which does not fatigue him.
Iodide of Arsenic; anxiety, restlessness and weakness; frequent sneezing and copious watery nasal discharge that burns the lip. Burning, watery discharge from the eyes like Arsenic. Arsenic wants to be very warm; wants hot water applied to the eyes; the only relief is front sniffing hot water up the nose. The Iodide of Arsenic is worse in a warm room, and, for days after sneezing, the discharge thickens and becomes gluey, looking like thick yellow honey, this excoriates; much pain through the root of the nose and eyes; often rawness in the chest with dyspnoea. The remedies having the dyspnoea are Arsenic, Iodide of Arsenic, Iodine, Kali hydr. and Sabadilla; these are the ones I have found most frequently indicated in the asthmatic forms of hay fever. If the complaint has been developed after being overheated about that time, you will find that Silica, Puls. and Carbo veg. must be carefully compared. There is another class of remedies having the stuffing up of the nose not relieved by the discharge. There is a constant desire to blow the nose, yet he gets no relief. This makes me think at once of Lach., Kali bi., Psor., Naja and Sticta.
Psorinum has the copious, watery, bland discharge from the nose, it may be excoriating, it has both. The stuffing up of the nose generally takes place in the open air ; he is relieved in a warm, dose room and by lying down; has some dyspnoea which is relieved by stretching the arms at right angles with the body. Hay fever is a psoric sickness. Psorinum given in a single dose will so develop the symptoms that the case will be more clear. The attack is not the best thing to prescribe for. If it is too violent, a short acting remedy may be selected that will mitigate it.
Nux Vomica has a free, easy breathing in the open air, but when he goes into the warm room his nose stuffs up, which also occurs at night, though the water drips on the pillow yet he stuffs up like Puls., Bry., and the Iodine preparations, Iodide of Arsenic and Cyclamen. Do not understand me to have given remedies for hay fever, we cannot lay down remedies for diseases. The whole constitution must be most carefully examined.
The face is sickly, often mottled, purple, intermixed with yellow and unhealthy colors; venous puffing; sensation of fullness; often a red face, like that of health, and the patient gets no sympathy; face often flushes; flushes of heat to the face; at times a sunken look; dark rings about the eyes; sallow, green, chlorotic. Subject to erysipelas; erysipelatous blotches on the face, spreading to the scalp, with stinging and burning; skin of face very sensitive to touch at such times.
Mumps and inflammation of parotid glands. If a woman suffering with mumps takes a decided cold the breasts swell, and there is an inflammation of the mammary gland. Girls take cold, the swelling of the parotid subsides too soon, and the corresponding mammary gland swells; sometimes both swell; or it may begin in one and go to the other. In men it is the testicle. Pulsatilla is one of the most important remedies in this form of metastasis; it breaks up complaints that flit about. Pulsatilla is the common remedy for enormously swollen testicles from mumps in a boy. Carbo vegetabilis is another remedy, but then you have. a Carbo veg. patient. Abrotanum is also useful in wandering around symptoms. Pulsatilla has wandering pains, rheumatism goes from joint to joint, jumps around here and there; neuralgic pains fly from place to place; inflammations go from gland to gland. But here is the distinguishing feature Pulsatilla sticks to its own text; it keeps jumping around, but it does not change to a new class of disease. Abrotanum has this metastasis, but it changes the whole diagnosis; that is, the allopath says, "This is a new disease today." The patient has a violent diarrhoea today, and an ignoramus suppresses it; an inflammatory rheumatism comes on, and he calls it a new disease. The suppression of a diarrhoea or a haemorrhage, or the removal of piles, causes an out-cropping somewhere else. A child has a summer complaint suppressed and there follow symptoms referring to the brain, kidneys, liver, or a marasmus with emaciation from below upwards. Such things are in the nature of Abrotanum.
Stomach. Hours after eating the patient eructates mouthfuls of sour, rancid, bitter fluid; liquids roll up from the stomach; always belching up rancid food. Some patients cannot digest butter; cannot use olive oil on their food. All sorts of bad tastes in the mouth. Several hours after eating has not finished digesting food in the stomach. Sour vomiting and eructations. Digestion is slow, and the patient goes to the next meal hungry; eating does not satisfy; assimilation is bad. Always bilious. Mouth is slimy and the taste is bad. All these symptoms are worse in the morning. "Accumulation of saliva and much mucus in the mouth.â€ "Flow of sweetish or tenacious saliva." "Constant spitting of frothy, cotton-like mucus.â€
A striking feature of the Pulsatilla patient is that he never wants water, Dryness of the mouth, but seldom thirsty. Even in many of the fevers he is thirstless, but there is at times an exception to thirst, in high fevers there may be some thirst. "Thirstlessness, with moist or dry tongue." "Desire for sour, refreshing things." Often desires things he cannot digest; lemonade, herring, cheese, pungent things, highly-seasoned things, juicy things. "Aversion to meat, butter, fat food, pork, bread, milk, smoking." "Scraping sensation in stomach and oesophagus like heartburn." Many pains in the stomach when empty or when full. But the bloating, the gas and the sour stomach are most striking. Gastric catarrh. Craves ice cream; craves pastries, yet they will not digest, and make him worse. Craves things which make him sick. This is not uncommon. The whisky drinker craves his liquor, yet knows it will kill him. So in Pulsatilla with regard to pastries. Craves batter cakes, with maple syrup, yet knows they will be vomited. Craves highly spiced sausage, yet averse to pork alone.
Pulsatilla produces and cures jaundice. "Jaundice in consequence of chronic susceptibility to hepatitis and derangement of secretion of bile, with looseness of bowels; duodenal catarrh; disordered digestion; feverishness and thirstlessness; after quinine."
Many troubles seem to manifest themselves in the abdomen by bloating, distension of the abdomen, flatulence, colicky pains, rumbling, fermentation of food, and from disorders of menstruation or diarrhoea. Great sensitiveness, tumefaction, tenderness; whole abdomen, stomach and pelvic organs sensitive to touch. Bloating after eating, especially after fats and rich foods. Fullness of the veins; general venous stasis. It brings about especially a tumid fullness of the abdomen, such a stuffed feeling that she cannot breathe. In a woman about to menstruate, there is bloating of the abdomen, stuffed feeling, has to throw off her clothes, cannot wear stays, wants to get into a loose dress or to go to bed so extremely puffed is she. Associated with this abdominal tumefaction the face and lips become bloated and puffed, the eyes red, and the feet puffed so that she cannot wear her shoes. There is also a sensation of dragging down, a sense of great weakness, commonly related to the menstrual disturbances or uterine disorders. The dragging down is recognized as prolapsus uteri. It is felt in the whole abdomen and is described as a funneling sensation, as if the parts would push out into the world, a dragging down. Oversensitiveness of the abdomen; especially in the lower part of the abdomen. She cannot stand on her feet or walk around much, because of the weight and dragging down. Labor-like pains in the uterus and back as if the menses would come on. It is not uncommon for the Pulsatilla patient to feel through the whole month as if she were about to menstruate.
The abdominal and bowel symptoms are associated. Cutting, flitting, changing pains. Pains urging to stool. Griping, in the bowels
associated with dysentery or diarrhoea; loose watery or green stools. A striking feature of the bowel symptoms is a loose, watery, green stool, continually changing; yellow, faecal, slimy. In summer complaints, when Pulsatilla is the indicated remedy, there will be hardly two stools alike; continually changing. This is characteristic of Pulsatilla in general; the pains wander; complaints change by metastases; the patient is scarcely ever twice alike. Diarrhoea alternating with constipation. Menstrual flow stops and starts, intermits and changes. In the Pulsatilla patient you never know what you will find next. Dysentery; dysenteric stools; scanty, slimy, bloody, green, watery stool with a little spurt; next stool might be diarrhoeic, with quite a copious discharge; thus you have diarrhoea and dysentery together.
Troublesome chronic constipation; stool large, hard and difficult to expel. It has (like Nux) frequent urging to stool without any stool, or frequent urging with only a scanty stool; goes many times before can pass a stool, Nux and Pulsatilla. Frequent unsuccessful urging in a chronic case is looked on as a keynote to Nux, but many remedies have it. Pulsatilla is one. The diarrhoea and bowel symptoms of Pulsatilla are worse in the evening and during the night; that is, the stools are worse at night. The stomach, throat and mouth symptoms are worse in the morning. The mental symptoms are worse in the evening. The bowel and stool symptoms are aggravated by keeping perfectly still, and ameliorated by gentle motion. There is much restlessness in Pulsatilla. Amelioration from motion in the cool open air. Feels stuffed up in a close room, and wants the windows open. "Dysenteric stools of clear yellow, red or green slime; pain in the back, straining." "Stools of deep green mucus; pain in the abdomen; no thirst." You will remember the word green in Pulsatilla, as it relates extensively to the catarrhal discharges.
Most troublesome constipation with haemorrhoids; violent pains in the haemorrhoids, worse lying down, ameliorated from gentle motion, worse from the warmth of the bed, better moving- about in the open air. She becomes so nervous in a room while at rest that the pains seem intensified and she must move about "Haemorrhoids; painful, protruding, blind, with itching and stitches in anus." The aggravation from lying down in extremely painful haemorrhoids is contrasted with Ammonium carb. which has violently painful haemorrhoids relieved by lying flat on the back. In violently painful haemorrhoids, with intense burning, think of Arsenicum and Kali carbonicum. In those with sticking, tearing pains study Ascuius. Looking over a number of years I have been forced to use in these yes a remedy not vet fully proven. In painful haemorrhoids, in a broken down constitution, where the whole disease seems to culminate in the haemorrhoids; bleeding, protruding; a mere touch almost causes a convulsion; it causes her to scream out at the top of her voice; it is so painful that she feels that death would be a relief; she lies in bed holding the nates far apart with her hands; after every stool she has three or four hours of extreme suffering. In these cases look up the Paeony. The haemorrhoids it cures look like the flowers of the plant, they are so inflamed, so red and bleeding; oozing; tender to touch; patient is so worn out with the pain. It has many times relieved the pain and cured these enormous haemorrhoidal tumors. I have cured them after they had been operated on, and all sorts of violence done them, without relief. Do not go to this drug if you can find a remedy that covers all the patient. Many patients will not confess any other symptoms, and some of these will suffer so much from the haemorrhoids alone that you will really need this remedy.
Urine frequent, scanty, with urging; wonderful tenesmus; extremely painful, bloody, burning, smarting urine; there is scarcely a drop collects in the bladder but it must be expelled. She cannot lie on the back without having a desire to urinate. She may go all night without urinating if she does not lie on the back, but the minute she turns on her back she is wakened by the desire to urinate and she feels that if she does not hurry she will pass it involuntarily. Involuntary urination when coughing and sneezing, or from a sudden shock or surprise, or from sudden joy, or from laughing, or from the noise of the slam of a door or a pistol shot. Pulsatilla has dribbling of urine, dribbles on the slightest provocation. She must keep her mind continually on it, or she will lose her urine. As soon as she goes to sleep it flows
away. Little, mild, gentle, florid, plethoric, warm-blooded girls, who kick the covers off at night and have nocturnal enuresis. Yellow, sallow, sickly girls who lose their urine in their first sleep call for Sepia.
Losing the urine in the first sleep is looked upon as a strong symptom, but you can figure it out, and hence it is not so. All those cases that have to make an effort to hold the urine during the day lose it in their first sleep; for then the mind is taken off it, and as soon as the mind is taken off it the urine dribbles. Causticum and Sepia are remedies looked upon as curing involuntary urination during the first sleep, but I have cured it with many other remedies. A man past middle age flooded the bed at night as soon as he went to sleep. The medicines which have this are limited and he had received them all. I found I must figure it out on another basis. I ascertained that when moving about at his work he had no difficulty in holding the urine, but when he sat down he had to make an effort to control it. At the time this condition developed he had been in Atlantic City and had bathed much in the ocean. Here were the aggravation and amelioration of Rhus, and Rhus cured him. Few would think of Bryonia in urinary trouble. When he moves the urine dribbles; when he walks it flows. He is relieved only by keeping quiet. Bryonia is aggravated by motion; Rhus is relieved by motion.
Pulsatilla has relief from motion. A few remedies have relief from slow motion and of these Pulsatilla and Ferrum are the most striking. A few remedies are relieved by hurried motion; want to move fast. Such are Bromine and Arsenicum. The arsenic child cannot be carried fast enough. The Pulsatilla baby is content with moderate motion. Any motion that heats up the Pulsatilla patient aggravates all the complaints. A wood sawyer working hard said his cough was relieved by moving about, but when he became heated up from sawing he had to sit down and rest on account of the violent spasmodic cough that would come on.
Pulsatilla has complaints from exposure to rain; getting feet wet. Urinary troubles worse when getting chilled (Dulcamara). Pulsatilla establishes a chronic, inveterate catarrh of the bladder. Copious mucous discharge, bloody discharge, especially after taking cold. Thick, ropy, purulent, green, offensive discharge.
Sexual desire unusually strong. "Long lasting morning erections." "Sexual excesses resulting in headache, backache; limbs heavy." "Burning and aching of the testicles, with or without swelling." Orchitis; inflammation and swelling of the testicles from suppressed gonorrhoea, from mumps, from catching cold, from sitting on damp ground, or on a cold stone when perspiring. Gonorrhoea suppressed by injections. ".Cold" settles in the testicles. Pulsatilla is the most frequently indicated remedy in gonorrhoea, in which the discharge is thick yellow or thick yellow and green, in those who are sensitive to heat, ameliorated walking in the open air. But also in persons with no other symptoms, and the gonorrhoeal discharge is thick yellow or green; no symptoms contra-indicating it. Troublesome lingering discharges; an old gleet rouses into a thick yellow discharge, when he takes cold or after coition. Frequent tenesmus; chordee; urging to urinate; burning urination and yellow discharge. Tumefaction about the penis. Foreskin dropsical (Nitric ac., Fluor. ac., Cann. sat.). Pulsatilla is useful in cases of suppressed gonorrhoea, with complaints following. Inflammation of the prostate. In old sinners with enlarged prostate, hard, flat, packed faeces; must always use a catheter
especially when trouble has been brought on by sexual abuses, sexual excesses, vices. Pain in the testicles; tearing in the swollen testicles. pain along the cord like cutting of knives; lacerating, tearing.
Exaggerated sexual desire; nymphomania; wild, beside herself with sexual thoughts; uncontrollable sexual desire. Inflammation of ovaries and uterus. Suppression of menses from getting feet wet. Menses too late, scanty. Face pale, yellow, sallow, or green lire a chlorotic patient. It overcomes the tendency to miscarriage, false conception, moles, etc., and stops the growth of fibroids, other symptoms agreeing. In pregnancy and during confinement many symptoms call for Pulsatilla. Most often called for when the patient is not irritable and the pains are very feeble, lasting for several days, and doing nothing; irregular, flitting, changeable pains, now up the back, now down the limbs; a prolonged first stage or prolonged preparatory symptoms. Chamomilla is more suitable if the woman is extremely irritable. But in a mild, gentle, mental state, when the pains are irregular, the os dilated and the contractions have let up, the pains too short, Pulsatilla will terminate that labor in a short time. The next pain after the dose will be a good one. You very often see in these cases that the outside parts are relaxed and the conditions are such that everything ought to go on well, but there is inaction. For weak pains Pulsatilla stands high.
Violent menstrual colic, causing her to bend double; soreness in the region of the uterus and ovaries; distended abdomen; throws the covers off; wants the windows open; tearful; weeps without a cause. Suppression of the menstrual flow from getting feet wet. Flow slow in being established and then scarcely more than a leucorrhoea. Menstruation that has been painful since puberty in plethoric girls. I have seen Pulsatilla cure a great many girls of sixteen to eighteen years old. The mother comes to me saying her daughter has suffered since her first menses; she went in swimming, or got her feet wet, and has suffered since. The doctor says the parts are undeveloped and she must be operated on. Pulsatilla h1s established a normal flow in a few months. Now I will give you a contrast in another remedy. Scrawny girls who are sensitive to cold, have also taken a bath at the time the first menses should appear, or have got the feet wet, and the flow is partially suppressed, or has come on with an inflammation; a state of undevelopment is established, a stenos; horrible menstrual colic; bearing down pains, as if everything would escape into the world, doubling the patient up; ameliorated by heat and aggravated by cold. Calc. phos. is the remedy. "In girls of red disposition, when puberty is unduly delayed, or menstrual function is defectively or irregularly performed; they are pale and languid, complain of headache, chilliness and lassitude." To develop these young girls Pulsatilla is a great remedy. Most troublesome cases of prolapsus. It competes with Sepia, Belladonna, Natrum mur., Nux vomica and Secale; all of these are remedies with great relaxation, bearing down; some have cured even procidentia. Pulsatilla cures many cases of gonorrhoea in females. I think it is most commonly indicated. A striking feature is, when the menstrual flow is present there is milk in the breasts. In girls at puberty milk in the breasts; a premature establishment of milk. In non-pregnant women, milk in the breasts. (Cyclamen and Mercurius.)
The chest, respiratory organs, and cough furnish some most troublesome symptoms. Bronchitis; pneumonia. Dry, teasing cough and dyspnoea; wants the windows open, aggravated lying down. Cough, gagging and choking. Copious expectoration in the morning, of thick yellow-green mucus. Dry, teasing cough at night, worse lying down. Chronic loose cough after measles. Whooping cough.
In the larynx we have many symptoms; constriction; tickling causing cough. Dry, teasing cough, worse lying and in a warm room. Cough worse at night.
Bronchitis with loose morning and dry evening cough.
Dyspnoea; oppression from walking fast or becoming overheated after eating; stopping up nose; after emotions. Spasmodic contraction of larynx. Tightness of chest; dyspnoea when lying on left side; suffocation in the evening and during the night. Asthma of children from suppressed rash or in women from suppressed menses. Loud rattling in the chest when lying. Chronic loose cough after measles. Expectoration of copious, thick, yellow-green, or bloody mucus; salty; offensive. Chronic catarrh of chest. Sensation of fullness in the chest in the evening with pulsation preventing sleep. Palpitation from lying on the left side. Soreness in the walls of the chest. Pain in the chest sometimes relieved by lying on the opposite side; dryness and rawness in the chest. Wandering tearing pains in the chest; cutting pains in pleurisy; violent heat in the chest. Haemorrhage of the lungs, dark blood. Dry cough in the evening, loose in the morning. Haemorrhage with suppressed menses or instead of the menses. Pulsatilla is very useful in catarrhal phthisis in chlorotic girls.
In curvature of the spine Puls. is of great value. Pain in the back, lumbar and sacral regions; wandering pans; spinal irritation after .sexual excesses. Rheumatic pains in the spine and limbs, worse during rest and better from slow motion. Pain in small of back as if sprained sensation of cold water poured down back.
All the limbs are painful; drawing, tearing pains in the limbs, better from motion and after motion; worse from a warm room and better from cold applications. Swelling of the veins in the arms and hands. Varicose veins of the limbs like Fl. ac. Rheumatism of joints; pin in joints as if dislocated. Sciatica worse in the evening and better from slowly moving about. Drawing and tension of muscles in lower limbs in the evening in bed. Tearing, jerking pains in the limbs, changing place. Burning in the veins. Purple swelling with violent itching of the feet as if they had been frozen. Feet burn, and he must put them out of bed. Soles burn and are bruised when walking. Marked restlessness and twitching of the limbs and feet; numbness of the limb lain on; wandering pains in all the limbs.
Sleeps on the back with hands over head. Cannot sleep on the left side as it increases the palpitation and suffocation. Confused, frightful, anxious dreams. Late falling asleep; sleeplessness on account of flushes of heat. Pulsatilla cures intermittent fever, coming on from disordered stomach. Chill morning and evening daily. The chill begins in the hands and feet; pains in the limbs during the chill; one-sided coldness with numb feeling; fever one sided. Thirst before the chill and seldom during the heat; heat with distended veins; sweat profuse all over or only on one side of the body. Vomiting of mucus during the chill.
PYROGEN
The potencies prepared from Heath's 3d of decomposed beef have been used by the author for many years against all forms of septic fever and sequels, when the symptoms agree. Violent chill intermingled with heat and sweat, or dry heat with marked aching in the limbs; restlessness, > by motion and heat. The sore bruised condition is as marked as in Arnica and Baptisia; the aching in the bones like Eupatorium, the restlessness, > by motion and heat like Rhus. Pains all aggravated sitting. Complaints come on from becoming cold, and from cold damp weather.
These features are found in hectic fevers in the last stages of phthisis, as well as septic fevers. It aborts puerperal fever in a few hours when clearly indicated. In cases of typhoid where there is the confusion like that found in Baptisia and the heat is too intense for that remedy. Pyrogen should always be considered. When the temperature reaches 106Â° and there is great soreness and aching this remedy will make great changes in a single day; but if the pains are > by motion and heat it will abort the fever.
When the pulse is extremely high, and the temperature not correspondingly high this remedy will be useful. On the other hand, when the pulse and temperature are out of rhythm either way this remedy should be considered if the case is of septic origin. Great pain when the flow from an open abscess becomes scanty. Violent burning in an abscess (Ars., Anthr., Tarent. C.).
Offensiveness prevails extensively; even putrid and cadaveric odors of body, breath, sweat and discharges. Fevers from sewer gas poisoning; erysipelas from infection and surgical fevers. It cures many chronic complaints that date back to septic conditions. She has not been well since a puerperal fever many years ago, is a good reason for thinking of Pyrogen.
A young man of good inheritance suffered from blood poison and made a poor recovery, and for several years was affected with abscesses in various parts. He was pale and sickly, rheumatic and stiff; at this time there was an abscess of the calf slowly forming. He took Pyrogen and made a rapid and complete recovery. This time the abscess did not open. He has remained in good health now ten years.
It has cured Bright's disease that could be traced to septic origin. It is a most useful remedy when there is threatening heart failure in septic and zymotic fevers. Septic haemorrhage, when the blood is dark. It will often save life in the most dangerous and rapid septic fevers.
Loquacity; can think and talk faster than ever before, especially during fever. Irritable. Delirium and confusion of mind about his body and limbs (Bapt.). Sensation as though he covered the whole bed.
Knew her head was on the pillow, but did not know where the rest of the body was.
Feels when lying on one side she is one person, and another when turning on the other side.
Sensation as though crowded with arms and legs.
These symptoms are much like Baptisia, but if the temperature runs very high Baptisia will not meet the condition so well as Pyrogen.
Violent congestion of the head with pressing pain and pulsation,> by pressure. Copious sweat on the head. Pain in occiput on coughing; in the morning on waking. The eyeballs are sore to touch, on turning them outwards or upwards. Septic bleeding from nose. Fan-like motion of alae nasi (Lyc.). Face pale, sunken, burning hot.
The mouth is foul, and the taste putrid. The tongue is coated, and brown. Brown streak down the center. Sordes on the teeth. Putrid odor from mouth. Vomiting; of bile, blood; of putrid masses. Vomits water when it becomes warm in the stomach. Stercoraceous vomiting. Coffee ground vomiting. Thirst for cold drinks during chill and heat.
Distension and great sensitiveness of abdomen. Inflammation of peritoneum, intestines and uterus, of septic origin. Rumbling in bowels. Pain on deep breathing. Cutting, colicky pain. Pain in right side going through to the back < on every motion, talking and breathing; > by lying on right side; groaning with every breath.
Copious, liquid, putrid stools. Involuntary stool. Profuse, watery, painless stool. Stool carrion-like. The difficult constipated stool also like carrion in odor. Constipation with hard dry, black, putrid stools; small black balls like olives. Putrid bloody stools. Soft narrow stools with great straining. Haemorrhage from bowels.
Urine scanty or suppressed. Red deposit, hard to wash off. Albuminous urine containing casts. Putrid urine. Frequent calls to urinate as the fever comes on. Intolerable tenesmus of the bladder; spasmodic contractions, involving rectum, ovaries, and broad ligaments (case cured by Yingling). Involuntary urine and stool in septic fevers.
Uterine haemorrhage. Putrid, scanty lochia. Suppressed lochia. Violent chill; puerperal fever. Menses lasting one day, then bloody leucorrhoea. Septic fever following abortion. Prolapsus of uterus.
Wheezing when expiring. Weak and husky voice, and hoarseness. Cough with large masses of mucus from larynx, < by motion, and in warm room. Cough causes burning in larynx and bronchi. Putrid, thick, purulent expectoration. Cough < by lying, > by sitting up. Bloody or rusty expectoration. Cough, with copious, offensive night sweats. It is a great palliative in the last weeks of consumption. Abscesses in lung.
Heart failure in septic fevers, < by least motion. Every pulsation felt in distant parts. Anxiety and sinking sensation in region of heart. Distinct consciousness of the heart. Aching at the bifurcation of the trachea. Oppression of chest and heart. Fullness in region of heart. Feels as if the heart were pumping cold water (Yingling). Palpitation. Loud heart beats. Sensation of purring of the heart. Rapid, irregular, fluttering pulse. Pulsation in the neck. Weak feeling in the back. Stitching in back on coughing.
Pain in all the limbs with great restlessness. Aching g in bones all over the body. Soreness of the muscles and the bed feels hard, > by motion. Cold extremities. Numbness of extremities Hands and arms numb. Hands cold and clammy. Pain in the thighs during chill and fever. Pain in the knees and legs during chill and fever, ameliorated from walking, and from heat. Aching in legs while sitting, > by walking. Aching above knee as if bone were broken, > by stretching of limbs and motion. Feet and legs dropsical. Numbness of feet.
Skin pale, cold, of ashy hue. Obstinate varicose offensive ulcers of old people. It has cured many old fever sores with putrid, thin, bloody discharges. Carrion-like perspiration. Putrid odors of the body. Must be covered in all stages. Chill ameliorated by warm bed. The chill is quotidian; it comes in the evening, generally at 7 P. M. The periodicity is regular. Cold sweat on the body. Hot sweat with high temperature. The sleep is full of frightful dreams. Persistent thoughts prevent sleep. Suffocation in sleep. Cries out in sleep from oppression of chest.
Swan's potencies of Pyrogen were made from septic pus (see B. & T.'s catalogue of Swan's Potencies). Swan procured from Heath a potency of artificial sepsin which was decomposed, lean beef. This Swan called sepsin. In the United States Swan's Pyrogen is in general use. Burnett used Heath's preparation. The author has used both, but prefers Heath's. Clark, in his dictionary, is mistaken when he says Swan's Pyrogen was made from Heath's decomposed beef. The author knew Swan well, and can vouch for these facts. Sherbino's proving was made with Swan's potencies and was, therefore, made with septic pus. Yingling's cures were made with Swan's potencies, therefore with septic pus.
RHODODENDRON
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
This is a very useful remedy in gouty patients who suffer from rheumatic pains, sometimes wandering from joint to joint, aggravated during rest, aggravated before and during storms, aggravated in cold, wet weather and ameliorated from warm wrapping. These pains may be in the head or the limbs. It is a great palliative in old people who have suffered long from gout. Rheumatic swelling of joints. Pain in the aponeuroses at night, during rest. He can always foretell a thunderstorm. There are tearing, shooting pains. Sore bruised pains. Stiffness of joints, neck and back. Extremely sensitive to cold weather, and aggravated from becoming cold. Paralytic weakness during rest, yet he is weak from exertion. Continued motion is his only relief. Painfully sensitive to windy cold weather. Chorea before a storm. General amelioration from motion, even when the painful part is aggravated from moving the affected part.
Fear of thunder in nervous persons (Phos.), forgetful. While talking he forgets what he was talking about. Leaves out words in writing. Aversion to his business. Easily affected by wine.
Violent rheumatic headaches in morning in bed, ameliorated by moving about, by wrapping up the head; aggravated from drinking wine, aggravated in cold wet weather. Headaches come on before a storm. Pain in temples and forehead. The head feels sore as if bruised. External heat ameliorates the head pains.
Pain in the eyes before a storm, ameliorated by heat and motion. Weakness of the internal recti muscles with stitching pains before a storm. Violent pain in ear, sometimes tearing, aggravated before a storm. Ameliorated by heat. Roaring, ringing and buzzing in the ears.
Neuralgia of the face in gouty subjects, aggravated from motion, aggravated from cold wind; ameliorated by applied heat. The patient is generally aggravated during rest; comes in stormy weather. Pains ameliorated by eating, and warmth. Pain in the teeth before a storm. Pain in teeth with earache, ameliorated by heat; aggravated at night, from cold drinks.
Feels full after little food (Lyc.). Empty eructations. Green bitter vomiting after drinking cold water. Sinking at the stomach. Pressure in the stomach after eating. Pain as from flatulence high up in sides of abdomen. Stitching in spleen from walking fast. Rumbling in abdomen and fullness after eating.
Much straining to pass a soft stool. Undigested, thin, brownish stool. Diarrhoea after eating, after fruit; from cold, wet weather, before a thunderstorm. Dysentery before a thunderstorm. Pulsating anus, drawing in anus extending to genitals. Drawing pain in bladder with frequent urging to urinate.
Orchitis with much swelling in rheumatic patients from taking cold, from sitting on a cold stone, from m suppressed gonorrhoea; the right most affected. Drawing pain in spermatic cord, during rest, ameliorated by heat and motion. Great pain in testes, cord, and hips, ameliorated by motion and heat. It has cured hydrocele in boys. Much itching of the scrotum.
Menses frequent and profuse. Serious cysts in the vagina.
Rheumatic stitching pains in chest in stormy weather during rest. Constriction of chest. Pain in heart.
Rheumatic pains and stiffness in neck and back. Pain in dorsal region extending to arms in cold, wet weather, aggravated during rest. Tearing pains in neck and back driving out of bed.
Rheumatic tearing pains in all the limbs in stormy weather, aggravated before a storm and during rest, aggravated at night; mostly in forearms and legs. Wandering pains in the limbs and joints. Pain in bone and periosteum. Pains drive him out of bed. Paralytic pains in limbs. Cannot sleep unless legs are crossed. Sleepless after midnight. Pain in the shoulder joint so severe that the arm cannot be moved but the patient and the pain are ameliorated by walking about.
SANGUINARIA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Blood root is an old domestic remedy. A great many eastern farmers' wives will not go into the winter without blood root in the house. In the cold winter days, when the coryzas come on, a "cold" in the head, throat and chest, then they get the blood root ready and make a tea of it. With them it is a routine remedy for "colds." They give it to combat all complaints, and there is no doubt but that even in this crude form it does break up "colds," because the provings show its relation to chest troubles and "colds" that go to the chest.
Periodic headaches, when the headache comes once in seven days; it begins in the morning on waking or wakes the patient up. It begins in the occiput and travels upward and settles over the right eye and in the right temple. It gets worse during the day and is aggravated by light, so that he is driven into a dark room and compelled to lie down. Vomiting comes on and the vomited matter is bile, slime, bitter substance and food, and then comes relief of the pain. The headaches are relieved from passing flatus up or down. If the patient suffers when he goes to bed with hot palms and soles, so that he must put them out of bed, this is an additional striking feature.
Take an individual who has missed his chronic headache, by some means, for a considerable time, but since then he has become increasingly sensitive to cold, and "colds" settle in the nose, throat and bronchial tube, and these parts feel as s if on fire, with rawness and burning; the expectoration is thick, tenacious mucus; disturbance of the belly, with much belching, and the belching is especially noticed after a violent attack of coughing.
It is not a very long acting remedy. When a periodic sick headache is interrupted by Sanguinaria, if a deeper drug, an antipsoric, is not given, the headache will return or something worse will come on, as Sanguinaria does not go deep into the nature of the case. I remember a case in which the patient missed his Sanguinaria headache and an epithelioma developed, which was cured by Phosphorus. I am convinced that if Phosphorus had been given at the end of the attack the cancer would not have developed, as Phosphorus was his constitutional remedy. If a chronic sick headache is interrupted the patient will tend to phthisis. Chest troubles come on and grow worse and worse. Its ability to palliate phthisis is very well known.
A patient much debilitated with bronchial catarrh; susceptible to cold, to every change in the weather, from change to damp weather, to every draft, to change of clothing; always taking new "cold." There is burning in the chest behind the sternum; thick, tough, ropy expectoration; spasmodic cough, and every cough ends in belching; eructations of gas; empty eructations. If to the burning in the chest, the severe pains in the larynx and trachea when talking, and cough ending in belching, you add heat in the palms and soles, Sanguinaria will patch him up and mitigate the trouble. Many such cases get Sulphur, but to their destruction. There is a class of remedies that suits these phthisical patients better than Sulphur, Silicea and Graphites; remedies such as Pulsatilla, Sanguinaria, Senecio gracilis and Coccus cacti, which palliate, mitigate his sufferings, and may even build him up so that he could take a medium potency of a deep remedy. But the deeper remedies ought to be avoided if the vital force is low, if the body is too much damaged to be repaired. Hahnemann warned against the use of Phosphorus in such cases of deficient vitality. Sanguinaria is a surface remedy; it does excellent palliation.
Catarrhal conditions of nose and throat, especially those due to colds and to poisonous plants; also rose colds. The Sanguinaria patient has "rose colds" in June. Sensitive to flowers and odors; subjects with hay fever. Hay fever patients with burning in the nose, in the throat, as if dry; as if the mucous membrane would crack open. Dryness and burning in the larynx, with hoarseness; dryness and burning throughout the chest, with asthma; associated with burning of the palms and soles. Examination shows the palms to be dry, wrinkled and hot to the touch; so, also, the soles, where the skin is thickened and indurated. Corns that burn; the toes burn and the patient puts the feet out of bed for relief.
When the headache is present it seems to be a general congestive headache; although beginning in the morning, coming up the back and extending to the right eye, the whole head is hot and aches.
Sulphur, Silicea and Sanguinaria have periodic weekly headaches. Arsenicum has a headache every two weeks. Not that these remedies will not cure other headaches, for Sanguinaria has also a headache every three days. The majority of headaches coming every two weeks are cured by Arsenicum or greatly mitigated in broken down constitutions. The attempt to cure a chronic sick headache should be made before the senile decline.
"Pulsations in the head with bitter vomiting; aggravated by motion." The headache is generally aggravated by motion, but not so strikingly as in Bryonia. When the Sanguinaria headache increases towards the afternoon or night, it becomes so severe he must go to bed; and the head becomes sore, and then a step or jar is extremely painful. A severe headache is likely to be disturbed by light, noise, motion, etc.
"Headache as if forehead would burst with chill, and burning in stomach." "Headache over right eye." This is a characteristic feature. "Periodic sick headache; begins in the morning, increases during the day, lasts till evening; head feels as if it must burst, or as if eyes would be pushed out; throbbing, lancinating pains through brain, worse on the right side, especially in the forehead and vertex; followed by chills, nausea, vomiting of food or bile; must lie down or remain quiet; ameliorated by sleep." Some of these things are not found in every case, but they all go to make up a Sanguinaria headache.
All sorts of neuralgic pains; cutting, tearing, lacerating pains ; as if the muscles were torn, or put on a stretch. Tearing pains anywhere, neuralgic or rheumatic. Pains about the scalp, but more particularly about the shoulder; and neck; stiff neck; cannot turn over in bed; cannot raise the arm, though he can swing it back and forth. Pain streaks up the neck; pain in the deltoid. It prefers the right side, but also cures the left side. Rheumatic pains in the right shoulder so that he cannot raise the arm, and all the muscles of the neck and back of the neck become involved; stiff neck. If the pain comes on in the day it increases as the day advances to o night. Complaints are worse at night in Sanguinaria.
A patient comes to you after exposure to cold; he cannot raise the arm; it hangs by his side; pain worse at night in bed, worse turning over (as he uses the shoulder muscle to turn over). It is probably in the deltoid but you need not speculate on the tissues involved.
It competes with Ferrum. All red-faced, highly flushed people, who cannot raise the arm and have pain which is worse in the daytime, not night, and ameliorated by slow motion need Ferrum. Sanguinaria is not relieved by motion; it is aggravated by such motion as calls the arm into use. Ferrum has relief from slow motion, aggravation from rapid motion and the pain comes in the daytime. While Ferrum has a uniformly red, plethoric face, Sanguinaria has a pale face. In the chest complaints Sanguinaria has a circumscribed red spot over the malar bones, such as seen in hectic patients.
Headache from stomach disturbances, overeating, rich food, drinking wine. Almost as useful as Nux in old drinkers. Those who disorder their stomachs and weaken their digestion by beer drinking; they cannot eat; vomiting of even a teaspoonful of water. No food or drink stays on the stomach. Headaches associated with such troubles. Vomiting and diarrhoea with complaints.
Catarrhal affections are prominent. Chronic catarrh of the throat; apparent thickening of the mucous membranes of the throat. Nose and pharynx fill with mucus. He hawks it out; there is a dry burning sensation, but the burning is most marked every time he takes a fresh cold.
Acridity of discharges is another feature. Acrid mucus forms in the nose, causing burning in the throat. Acrid, hot fluids eructated from the stomach, excoriating the throat and mouth. The diarrhoea is accompanied by an acrid watery stool; especially in infants; the nates become raw and red. This burning extends all through the bowels; burning in the abdomen and stomach in old gastric troubles; vomiting of even a teaspoonful of water with burning; old gastric irritation; dyspepsia; all sorts of disorders of the stomach.
Tongue red and burns as if in contact with something hot. Burning in pharynx and oesophagus, burning in roof of mouth. Tonsillitis with burning. "Heat in throat, ameliorated by inspiring cold air; throat so dry it seems as if it would crack." This burning excoriated feeling applies to all the mucous membranes affected.
Patient suddenly taken to bed with a chill; burning in the chest; symptoms of pneumonia; rusty expectoration; violent cough; every cough felt as a concussion at the bifurcation of the trachea; as if a knife were in the parts; as if torn asunder; and after the cough copious, loud, empty eructations. No other remedy has this.
"Nausea with burning at the stomach, with much spitting." Nausea not relieved by vomiting. Keeps on vomiting and retching. Burns as if on fire. Arsenic is often given by mistake, because of the great burning.
"Vomiting of bitter water; of sour, acrid fluids; of ingesta; of worms; preceded by anxiety; with headache and burning in stomach; head relieved afterwards; with prostration." Such symptoms occur is headache, disordered stomach, sour stomach. The sour stomach is manifested by sour eructations or sour vomiting. A patient often speaks of "a sour stomach," and you must find out whether he means sour eructations or sour vomiting. He says he "spits up" sour food.
With the headache and many complaints Sanguinaria has a faintness; like a hunger, yet not for food. A finking, faint, "all gone," empty feeling. It is like Phosphorus with its "hungry headache." Psorinum leads all others in "hungry headaches," but Psorinum wants to eat and cannot get enough. Sanguinaria has a hunger, but it is not for food; aversion at the thought and smell of food. Psorinum can eat a wolf meal, and so can Phosphorus. It is a false hunger with the headache in Sanguinaria. "Burning in stomach; with headache and chill."
Belching up of acrid hot fluids in asthma; hay asthma. Sanguinaria palliates asthma associated with stomach disorders. Do not forget Nux in asthma from stomach troubles.
Liver complaints; pains and aches and sense of fullness. Bilious trouble described in general terms. It seems as if the liver makes an enormous quantity of bile, but there is a gastro-duodenal catarrh, so that the bile is regurgitated into the stomach instead of going down, and it is eructated as bitter, green, yellow fluid; vitiated bile. This is a peculiar thing. If you watch a chronic Sanguinaria patient you will notice that the stomach will be disordered for a week; spitting up bile; much flatulence; sour hot eructations; then all at once this will disappear, and a diarrhoea, which fairly floods him, comes on suddenly; a bilious, liquid, gushing stool. Natrum sulph., Sanguinaria, Pulsatilla and Lycopodium cure this alternation of diarrhoea and constipation.
"Os uteri ulcerated; foetid, corrosive leucorrhoea." "Distension of abdomen in the evening and flatulent discharges by vagina from os uteri, which was constantly open; at same time a pain passing in rays from nape of neck to head."
"Chronic dryness in throat, sensation of swelling in the larynx and expectoration of thick mucus when associated with dryness, rawness, burning and smarting." " Whooping cough; constricted, spasmodic action across throat beneath jaws; cough worse at night with diarrhoea." Cough worse at night with diarrhoea is the feature this remedy is prescribed for. "Severe cough occurring after whooping cough, when patient takes cold, which partakes of the spasmodic nature of whooping cough." An adult takes cold and has a spasmodic cough, like whooping cough. He says it is a stomach cough, because there is a gagging with it. In all there is burning and diarrhoea.
"Distressing, dry, spasmodic, exhaustive coughs, especially in children; worse towards night, lying down, going into a cold room to sleep; feeling of rawness and burning in bronchi." The trachea seems so sore, and it is sore; a bolus of food passing down the oesophagus can be plainly felt; he can outline the part where the food passes.
SARSAPARILLA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Sarsaparilla is suitable in low forms of chronic disease, especially in complex states resulting from mixed miasms; especially in cases of sycosis and syphilis ; cases made complex by Mercury; sycosis, syphilis, and psora. Weakness stamps itself on the whole economy, as in Merc., Lach. and other remedies. The tissues become flabby, refuse to heal when injured, ulcerate from slight causes. After an injury an open sore remains and is indolent or becomes phagedenic and spreads like Ars., Lach., and Merc. cor. Weakness over the whole body; a paralytic feeling. In the mental sphere it manifests itself in a dazed state, he is unable to comprehend, the mind is slow, it is a weakness bordering on imbecility, which in the end it may reach. Weakness of the mind and the tissues.
All the organs are slowed down, weak, sluggish, become congested. Weakness and dilatation of the veins, tendency to form varices in the limbs, varicose ulcers, haemorrhoids, varicose veins of the face and body. The face is often red and discolored in patches. When the circulation is feeble the parts turn blue, over the shin bones; on the backs of the feet, toes; blue spots like approaching senile gangrene. Useful in old age when black and blue spots appear on the backs of the hands and elsewhere.
Moist, itching, scurfy, and scabby eruptions. The skin of the backs and the palms of the hands becomes thick and indurated with a bran-like scurf resembling psoriasis, intermingling with blue spots.
This remedy has many features as to cold and heat- The use of heat internally aggravates all complaints, but there is an external coldness relieved by heat; taking warm food and drink aggravates; wants cold food, but heat applied externally is grateful.
Secale also produces great weakness of tissue, with venous stasis, ulceration and gangrene. But the two remedies, though similar in appearance, differ in regard to heat and cold. The stomach is in a most miserable condition. Flatulence, continuous nausea, eructations and vomiting of sour food. Always complaining of fermentation and uneasiness of the stomach as if he had overeaten or as if the food had spoiled; digestion is slow and feeble.
Organs become tumid and congested. The throat, tongue, and mouth look as if about to ulcerate; purple spots look as if they would break down, but remain intact for weeks and months. Oedema of tissues, of the lower extremities, pitting on pressure; dropsical conditions; Bright's disease.
Suitable in old syphilitics whose complaints have been suppressed by Mercury; mind and body in a state of prostration; paralytic weakness of the lower extremities, no endurance; the heart palpitates on exertion; suffocation on the least exertion; always tired; ulcers here and there on the body; the skin is flabby and full of distress at night. Bone-pains worse at night. Sars. antidotes the Merc. and establishes reaction.
Marasmus of children from hereditary syphilis; emaciation about the neck; dry, purple, copper-like eruptions; no assimilation.
The child is always passing sand in its diaper, yellowish or whitish like chalk; the child screams when it is about to urinate, because it remembers how painful the passing of urine is. Sometimes at the close of urination it gives forth an unearthly yell. This symptom is found in old broken down constitutions, a clutch in the bladder just as it shuts down causes him to cry out; pain at the end of urination.
Old debauches, enfeebled by wine and women, with weak heart, lungs, brain, and bladder, emaciated and shriveled. Prematurely old, a man of forty looks to be eighty, feet swollen, totters about on a staff. Nus will palliate in early periods of break down, but the time comes when he is weak in body and mind and must have such remedies as Sars., Lach., Secale, etc.
Children emaciated; face looks like old people; big belly; dry, flabby skin; mushy passages. Eruptions appear in the Spring. All the venous remedies are braced up by Winter and go down in the Spring, as Lach., Secale and Hamam.
Catarrh of the bladder and kidneys. Involuntary urination of children at night in bed, in feeble children. There is a spasmodic condition of the sphincter, when sitting to urinate, which makes the act impossible in that position, but wizen he stands up the urine flows freely. This is especially important when the symptom occurs in women, because they have great difficulty in urinating while standing. Copious urine at night; he floods the bed, but during the day he can pass it only when standing.
It is fifteen years since I reported the following case and the man has remained well ever since: "A man, aet. 52, addicted to whiskey for years, had a copious flow of blood from the bowels some four months ago; the exertion of walking a few blocks causes suffocation; after the loss of blood, feet began to swell, both limbs to middle of thigh very oedematous, has had two or three nondescripts chills; a few months ago, sudden paralytic weakness of left arm and leg, passed off in three hours, leaving a numbness in left hand and a tearing pain in left side of face and head; no appetite; bloody discharge with stools; feels as ii in a dream all the time; loss of memory; face covered with varicose veins and very red; general venous stasis; feeling on the top of the head as if struck with a hammer; must pass urine several times in a night; urine thick and cloudy after standing; but dear when first passed; has had much worry from financial troubles; cannot pass urine when sitting at stool, but flows freely when he is standing, albumen in the urine." When Sars. can take such a man, 52 years old, and restore him to health it is worth considering.
"Jerking sensation along the male urethra." "Each time she makes water, air passes out of the urethra with a gurgling noise." This symptom is common in catarrh of the bladder; it is caused by fermentation of the mucus and consequent formation of gas. "Frequent ineffectual urging to urinate with diminished secretion."
This medicine has many times dissolved a stone in the bladder; it so changes the character of the urine that it is no longer possible for the stone to build up, and it grows smaller by the continual dissolving off from the surface. I have seen the high colored, bloody, and mucous urine cleared up after the administration of Sars., but on standing, the sand would appear. When the urine again becomes cloudy, it is time for another dose. The urine holds in solution, that is, actually dissolves the substance of the stone.
Some years ago there was an old man upon whom a surgeon was expected to operate. They had sounded his bladder and said that he had a stone, but he came to the conclusion that he would not permit the operation. In spite of their warnings he sent for me and I took charge of his case. His symptoms called for Sars. The enormous amount of sand he passed in the next year was wonderful. It mitigated the catarrh and kept the bladder comfortable. At the end of a year, after a night of great suffering, he passed a stone the size of a pea. He passed several small stones after that and then returned to health.
A young man passed so much crusty deposit that I ordered him to use one commode and let it settle, pouring off the urine. At the end of a month there was a laver a sixteenth of an inch thick. This patient under Sars. had no stone. The sand continued to pass, but was held in solution and deposited only on cooling. In the course of time it disappeared. He was of a gouty nature and this was relieved.
Sars. has gouty nodes with extreme soreness. After the remedy has been given, there is a deposit of sand in the urine, which shows the good action of the remedy and should not be stopped.
"Obstinate constipation with violent urging to urinate; urging to stool with contraction of the intestines; excessive pressure from above downward, as if the bowels were pressing out; during stool, violent tearing, cutting in the rectum. Stool small, with much bearing down." "Old, dry, sycotic warts remaining after Mercurial treatment for gouty pains."
SELENIUM
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Marked mental and physical weakness following prolonged fevers, after sexual excesses, from secret vice, from exposure to the heat of the sun in summer. Great fatigue from which he seems unable to recuperate from rest. Slight exertion brings great fatigue and weakness and especially in hot weather. Sudden weakness in hot weather. Great weakness in the back, almost paralytic after typhoid fever or other temporary diseases. Extremely sensitive to a draft of air, cool. warm or damp. Marked general emaciation, also special emaciation of face, thighs and hands. The diseased limb withers. The hair falls out all over the body, head, eyebrows, whiskers and genitals. All his nervous symptoms are aggravated after coition. Pulsation in all the limbs and in the abdomen after eating. Extreme sadness. Some complaints are worse from wine, tea and lemonade. It is of great value in
drunkards. Irresistible desire for alcoholic stimulants. Symptoms worse after sleep, especially on a hot day. Irritable after emissions. He is indifferent to his surroundings and his mind is dull and in confusion. He is very forgetful during his waking hours, but in sleep he dreams what he has forgotten. Makes mistakes in syllables and mispronounced words. Stammering speech. Often fails to understand what he hears or reads. He has become unfit for his business. He is excitable and talkative in the evening Mental exertion is exhaustive and he dreads company. His mind dwells on lascivious thoughts, yet he is sometimes impotent All the mental symptoms are worse after coition.
Vertigo on rising from bed or seat, on moving about, with nausea, vomiting and faintness, worse after breakfast and dinner. Headaches from strong odors, after wine, tea, lemonade and alcoholic stimulants, violent stinging over left eye when walking in the heat of the sun. Increased flow of urine in headaches. Headaches in old drunkards.
The hair falls out from the whole head, leaving the scalp smooth and hairless; also the hair falls from the eyebrows and face, giving a strange appearance. In syphilitics it often checks the falling of the hair. It has cured eczema, tingling and itching of the scalp. The scalp feels as though tightly drawn over the bones of the skull.
Itching vesicles on the edges of the eyelids and spasmodic twitching of left eyeball. The ear is stopped and ear wax becomes hard, from which he has hardness of hearing. Dark clotted blood from nose. Nose full of thick, yellow, jelly-like mucus. Itching of nose and he bores into his nose with the fingers. Chronic obstruction of nose. Coryza followed by watery diarrhoea.
The face is sickly, looking greasy and shiny. Great emaciation of the face. Twitching of the muscles of the face. Toothache from drinking tea. Aversion to food much salted. White tongue and he does not relish his breakfast. Irresistible longing for strong drink. After eating pulsation all over the body, especially in the abdomen. Symptoms are worse from sugar, salt food, tea and lemonade.
Soreness in liver from pressure and inspiration, with a rash over the right hypochondrium. Searching pain in right hypochondrium, worse on deep breathing. The liver is enlarged. Stitching pains in liver from motion and pressure. Constipation with inactivity of the rectum. Most difficult stool, even impaction. Stool large, hard and very dry, requires mechanical aid. Soft pasty stool. Watery diarrhoea.
Involuntary urination while walking, after urination and after stool. Twinge of pain outward along the urethra with a sensation as though drops were pouring out. Sensation as if biting drop was forcing itself out. The urine is dark, scanty, red in evening. Sediment coarse, red and sandy. It has caused inflammation of the prostate gland. In chronic gonorrhoea it is a very useful remedy.
Extreme weakness of the male genitalia. Though the desire is strong there are no erections, or the act of coition is unsatisfactory and incomplete. Frequent emissions and constant flow of prostatic fluid. Erections in the morning without sexual desire, but on attempting coition the penis becomes relived. Itching and formication of genitalia. Menses copious and dark. Pulsating in the abdomen during pregnancy, worse after eating.
The weakness and failure of the voice is in keeping with the general weakness. Hoarseness on beginning to use the voice. Hoarseness from weakness after over-use of the voice for a long time. Much clear, starchy mucus scraped from the larynx. Must frequently clear the larynx. It is a very useful remedy in tubercular laryngitis; glands of neck large and hard.
Dry, hacking cough in the morning, weak feeling in the chest. Expectoration of lumps of bloody mucus. Difficult breathing from any exertion and from mucus in the chest and air passages. Pain in right side of chest under lowest ribs extending to kidneys which are tender to pressure.
Weak back and spine as if he would be paralyzed after typhoid fever, and other lingering diseases. Stiffening neck on turning head; lameness in back in the morning. It has cured syphilitic psoriasis of the palms. Itching palms. Hands withered. Tearing pains in hands at night.
Emaciation of the legs. Great weakness of lower limbs. Itching of the ankle in the evening, blisters on the toes. Flat ulcers on the legs and about the ankles. Cramps in calves and soles. He is sleepless until midnight. Sleeps in short naps. Awakens early and always at same hour. Symptoms worse after sleep.
Chill alternates with heat. Burning heat in spots. Sweat, profuse on chest, armpits and genitals staining yellow. Sweat from least exertion. Moist itching spots here and there on the skin and tingling after eruptions have been treated locally. Flat ulcers. Itching about finger joints and between fingers.
It is said to be incompatible with China. It is much like Sulphur in general action, and Phos. acid in its action upon the nervous system and genitals. The chest symptoms and expectoration are like Argentum met., Stannum. Its constipation is much like Alumen and Alumina It should be carefully compared with these remedies.
SEPIA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Sepia is suited to tall, slim women with narrow pelvis and lax fibers and muscles; such a woman is not well built as a woman. A woman who has the hips of a well built man is not built for child bearing; she cannot perform the functions of a woman without becoming relaxed in the pelvic organs and tissues. Such a build is a Sepia build, very tall slim, narrow, straight from the shoulders all the way down.
One of the strongest features of the Sepia patient is found in the mind, the state of the affections. To a great extent, the remedy seems to abolish the ability to feel natural love, to be affectionate. To illustrate it in the language of the mother: "I know I ought to love my children and my husband, I used to love them, but now I have no feeling on the subject." The love does not go forth into affection, there is a lack of realization, a lack of ability to register such affections; the love does not manifest itself. Upon reflection it will be seen that the love itself cannot be so changed, but the affections can be as they are the expression of the love. It is a striking feature of this remedy that the affections are stilled; all things seem strange; she does not realize; she may even be estranged and turned aside from those she loves. This is on the border land of insanity; it is quite a different state of affairs from that when a woman abused by her husband knows in her rational mind that she does not love him.
This state is brought out in a woman during confinement, after uterine and other haemorrhages, after prolonged indigestion; high living with disturbance in the circulation, pallor, enfeeblement of body and mind. It is seldom manifested in a man, but it is a striking feature in the woman. It often comes on when nursing a child, from nursing an over-vigorous child or twins who require much lacteal fluid and drag her down. It may be brought out in a woman who has an over-vigorous husband. Excessive sexual excitement and over-indulgence brings on coldness and she becomes a cold woman.
She who has been excitable, nervous, and fidgety becomes the opposite, cold, takes on a stoical state of mind. Yet Sepia has all the excitability of any medicine, aggravated by noises, excitement, company, extreme irritability of tissue and mind; an excitable suicidal patient ; melancholy, sits and says nothing; taciturn; answers questions in monosyllables when pressed to answer. An absence of all joy, inability to realize that things are real; all things seem strange; no affection for the delightful things of life; no joy; life has nothing in it for her. She is worse in company yet dreads to be alone; and when she is in company she is spiteful, in the midst of her dullness of mind she is spiteful; she vents her spite on those she loves best. The Sepia woman permits no opposition to her opinions. The best impression of her is lost if controversy arises.
The next most general state is a peculiar sallowness which you will need to see to fix in your mind. Sepia has jaundice, yet this peculiar sallowness is a waxy, anaemic appearance, mottled with yellow, a yellow, sallow tint across the nose and the cheeks described as a yellow saddle across the nose and down the sides of the face. It is also common for the whole face to be covered with enormous freckles, great brown patches as in pregnancy, brown spots on the cheeks, brown warts, warts that have been red or pink become pigmented; liver spots on the face, chest, and abdomen. The skin of the flee is sallow and doughy, looks as if the muscles were flabby; you will seldom see Sepia indicated in the face that shows sharp lines of intellect; a person who has been thinking a long time has the lines and sharp angles of a thinking person, of one who possesses will and intellect. The Sepia subject is one who is rather stupid and dull, thinks slowly and is forgetful; the mind is anything but active and we see it in the face. In many instances, however, the Sepia patient is a quick patient, but the dullness of intellect is the most striking feature and it reflects itself upon the face. The face is generally puffed, often smooth and rounded and marked by an absence of intellectual lines and angles.
This patient is anaemic, pale lips and ears, pale, sallow face, fingers and hands become shriveled, sallow, waxy, bloodless. Sepia establishes a progressing emaciation of the body and the skin becomes wrinkled; the person looks prematurely old; wrinkles intermingled with sallow spots on the face in one who is 35 years of age, making him look as if he were fifty. A child looks like a shriveled dried up old person..
With all complaints there is constipation. The bowels lose their ability to expel their contents and the patient is always constipated; constipation during pregnancy; slow, difficult stool; stool like sheep dung. Always has a feeling of a lump in the rectum, never able to empty the bowels; though he goes to stool there is always a sensation of a lump remaining in the rectum. 'When the stool passes into the lower bowel, it is not expelled until there is an accumulation, which presses the stool out.
Another feature present in most Sepia patients is a gnawing hunger, seldom satisfied; even though he eats plentifully he feels a gnawing, empty, hungry feeling in the stomach, not relieved by eating or relieved only for a moment. This is striking especially when associated with the constipation and the peculiar state of the affections.
When these symptoms are associated with prolapsus, Sepia will certainly cure, no matter how bad the prolapsus has been or what kind of displacement there is. It is the result of the state of relaxation of all the internal parts as if they were let down, wants a bandage to hold the parts up or wants to place the hand or a napkin on the parts; a funneling sensation, better sitting down and crossing the limbs When these symptoms group themselves together, the gnawing hunger, the constipation, the dragging down, and the mental condition, it is Sepia and Sepia only. One is not sufficient but it is the combination.
Sepia has a marked catarrhal tendency, tendency to milky discharges from mucous membranes. Long after digestion has ceased and the stomach is empty comes nausea and sometimes vomiting. It is a catarrhal state of the stomach and when it persists with the milky vomiting, Sepia is very valuable. This is not an uncommon feature in the vomiting of pregnancy. Vomits up food and after emptying the stomach of its contents, vomits or eructates a milky fluid; morning vomiting, first of food then a milky substance. Do not confound this with vomiting of milk. Some medicines vomit milk alone and Sepia does this also. Whitish, milky discharges from the posterior nares, from the vagina, excoriating, milky leucorrhoea, which at times takes on the appearance of curds, thick, cheesy, and horribly offensive; it has also thick, green and yellow discharges; it has dry crusty formations on mucous membranes.
Prolonged inveterate catarrh of the nose, thick, green, and yellow crusts are blown from the nose and sometimes are hawked from the posterior nares, thick, leathery formations. Loss of taste and smell. The smell of cooking food, meat and broth causes nausea. Catarrh of the chest with thick, tenacious, yellow expectoration accompanied with a violent cough, retching, gagging, violent prolonged retching, vomiting; dry cough and yet there is rattling. Whooping cough; asthmatic cough with retching and loss of urine. The cough is a violent one. Cough during first sleep (Lach., in irritable children Chain.). Tuberculosis. Quick consumption after a suppressed gonorrhoea; if given soon enough it will check. Spasmodic dry cough in the evening until midnight; holds the chest during the cough (Bry., Nair. sulph., Phos.).
Eruptions on the skin. Tendency to produce herpetic eruptions about the genitals, lips and mouth; ring-worm upon the face and body. It has cured zona, and herpetic eruptions of the labia and foreskin. Vesicular eruptions in the axilla, upon the tips of the elbows; eruptions that pile up in great crusts on the elbows; thick crusts form upon the joints; eruptions between the fingers; moist eruptions that pour out a watery fluid, or thick, yellow, purulent fluid.
Sepia produces the induration that belongs to some forms of eruption like epithelioma; indurations will form on the Iips and crack and bleed. This scaly eruption that looks like epithelioma is especially Sepia. When the scales come off a yellow, green, ichorous base remains, and as soon as one crust peels off, another forms; finally if torn off prematurely, it bleeds. Sepia has cured epithelioma of the lips, wings of the nose, and eyelids. It has cured old indurations caused by the use of a clay pipe, where it continues to form, and beneath it is seen this thick, yellow, purulent exudation. It is indicated in lumps and Iupoid formation on the skin, where there is infiltration; sometimes healing from the center to form a ring; this is a typical Sepia condition. The hardness and purple color are what are peculiarly sepia. Sepia stands on a par with Lach. for this purple aspect.
Sepia has a hysterical diathesis. Brea s out in spells of weeping, is sad one minute, gentle, yielding, and in another she is disagreeable, excitable, obstinate. You do not know what she is going to do next. She says and does strange things, makes errors, no dependence can be placed in her; no mental endurance; no affection for her family; whole mind weak and disordered, not when there is fever but it is a chronic manifestation of psora or sycosis. Fear of ghosts; that something unusual will happen; atmosphere full of figures, not seen but she knows that they are there, departed friends or other forms and very often in accordance with religious belief. Never happy unless annoying someone; relating her grievances; sarcastic; insulting; fear of insanity, poverty. "Fears to starve, is peevish and feels mortified, easily frightened and full of forebodings." "Passionate, irritable; the greatest irritability from slight causes, very easily offended. Vexed and disposed to scold."
The headaches are nervous, bilious, periodic, violent, involving the whole head; congestive. Generally better lying down, keeping perfectly quiet; worse from ordinary motion, but relieved by violent motion, like most Sepia symptoms in general; she can walk off her sufferings. Stasis of the brain, slowness of thought, mind will not work and mental labor aggravates the headache. A good substantial sleep relieves it, but if she is wakened after sleeping a short time, the headache is worse. The same is seen in regard to motion; moving the eyes, head, or body, moving about in a warm room aggravates the pain, but a good, long walk in the open air until she becomes heated up, relieves. It is a sluggish state of the body which requires exercise and violent exercise to keep it in a state of comfort. The Sepia symptoms are worse in the open air unless combined with continued motion, better from exercise in the open air and worse in the house. The headache is worse from stooping, motion, coughing, going up stairs, jarring, light, turning the head, lying on the back and from thinking, but continued, hard exercise relieves as does a tight bandage, and the application of heat, though worse in a warm room.
There are Sepia headaches that particularly affect the occiput, worse in the morning; great pain through the eyes and temples; relieved by sweat, worse on beginning to move; throbbing felt on stooping, worse on going up stairs.
The Phos. headache is relieved by sleep, but continued, rapid motion aggravates. Cannot endure it Sepia is suited to the old fash ioned bilious headaches. It is better from vomiting; the pain gradually increases, loathing of food, then nausea, vomiting and the patient falls asleep and wakens without the headache. Sang. resembles it, is better vomiting, better in a dark room; the direction is different, however.
Neuralgia of the head; periodic sick-headaches in gouty people; violent, congestive headaches in young women sensitive to noise, women of extremely delicate fiber, especially those with dark eyes, dark skin, and who become sallow from sickness. Jaundice often sets in with the headaches; at the close of the headache vomiting, and in a few days jaundice, which passes away but returns again with the next headache. Headache every morning with nausea; the smell of food repulsive_
Sepia takes on a stupid state of mind as mentioned above; will not work; will not answer questions; as if intoxicated, benumbed; eyes and face swollen, sclerotics yellow and jaundice. This sometimes ends in violent vomiting spells. Craves spicy, pungent, bitter things like beer in old drunkards with headache; threatening apoplexy. "Apoplexy in men addicted to drinking and sexual excesses, with a disposition to gout and haemorrhoids, etc." "Threatening apoplexy in a dissipated, middle-aged man, who is subject to arthritic and haemorrhoidal complaints; they have usually passed through several light attacks of apoplexy and are frequently visited with prodromic symptoms."
Under external head we have eruptions and falling out of the hair; yellow crusts; oozing of pus and other fluids; vesicles; eczema of infants. Eyes; catarrhal symptoms with vesicles and pustules; granular lids; ulcers and psoric manifestations; various infiltrative conditions of the eyes and about the eyes; pustules on the margins of the lids, pustules on the globe of the eye, seems as if looking through a gauze; tarsal tumors, agglutination of lids, styes, etc. The ears discharge thick, yellow pus; offensive.
The nose is a favorite locality; loss of smell; yellow or green thick crusts fill the nose and cannot be blown out; inveterate discharge of thick yellow pus. "Large offensive-smelling plugs from the nose, often so large that they have to be drawn back into the mouth and expectorated, causing vomiting. Dry coryza especially of left nostril. Blowing of large lumps of yellow or green mucus or yellow-green crusts with blood from the nose." This is descriptive of the worst forms of catarrh; very few will let it run on thus far, they apply local treatment and heal the nose up, and, the process at once going to the chest, phthisis pituitosa comes on.
The gums settle away from the teeth. Toothache and neuralgia from taking cold. Sensation of a lump in the throat (like Lach.), but the latter is better from swallowing. (The same in worm troubles indicates Cina.) Uneasiness of the collar and corsets like Lach. Worse in the first sleep like Lach.
Sepia brings out many things in connection with the appetites, thirst, eating, drinking and stomach, etc. The Sepia patient is generally conscious of a spoiled stomach, sour and bitter eructations of food, of mucus and bile, sour and bitter vomiting of food and mucus; all-gone, hungry, empty feeling in the stomach sometimes not relieved by eating. At times a gnawing pain, a sinking, a gnawing hunger which is not always relieved by eating. Almost constant nausea, especially in the morning, nausea and eructations and vomiting of milky fluid; when the stomach is empty, vomiting, spitting up, eructations of milky fluid. Aversion to food, to the smell of food cooking, like Colch. and Ars. The patient gets up in the morning with an all-gone feeling, distress and fullness in the stomach followed by belching and uprisings of mucus, and milky fluids ; vomiting of pregnancy ; vomiting of milky water in the morning; this is a characteristic of Sepia.
Acrid, burning eructations; heartburn; rancid eructations, excoriating the throat; pyrosis which is another form of eructation ; acrid, sour fluids burning all the way up, causing contraction, tingling, smarting. Nausea violent; deathly sinking accompanied with an awful anxiety in the stomach. Phos. has more of the typical hunger which is relieved by eating. The Ignatia patient is always sighing; cannot get rid of "that feeling." Oleander has an all-gone, empty feeling as if he would die; food does not relieve, is not digested, but passes undigested the next day.
Lyc. has an all-gone feeling sometimes not better by eating, felt as markedly before as after eating, and after eating there comes a throbbing. Kali carb. has it also, without the amelioration from taking food; it is even intensified by eating, which is followed by a sensation of fullness and throbbing.
In severe liver and heart affections the stomach is not able to keep up assimilation; palpitation, great weakness, liver congested, white stool. Digitalis comes in here with its deathly sinking not better by eating. In Sepia this symptom is associated with the loss of affections, the lump in the rectum, with the constipation, etc.
"Pain in the stomach after the simplest food. Stitches and burning in the stomach. Pain in the stomach worse by vomiting." This is peculiar, for vomiting usually relieves the distress. The Sepia stomach becomes like a leather bag, fill it up and the food comes up just as eaten or at times sour or mixed with bile.
Inflammation of the liver, enlargement with jaundice, pain, fullness, distension, distress in the region of the liver.
Abdomen distended with flatus, rumbling and distension. These disturbances are often chronic as in pot-bellied mothers; abdomen covered with brown spots. Sepia has removed tape-worm.
Chronic diarrhoea, stools jelly-like, lumpy; alternating diarrhoea and constipation; a great amount of mucus with the stools, whether constipated or diarrhoeic; hard stool covered with a great quantity of jelly-like mucus. Goes for days without a stool and then sits and strains until a copious sweat breaks out and yet no stool, but after assistance with the finger and prolonged strain a little stool is passed, followed by a cupful of jelly-like mucus, yellow or yellow-white and very offensive.
The acute diarrhoeas and dysenteries with jelly-like stools are more in keeping with Kali bi. and Colch. This in chronic diarrhoeas or in constipation with stool covered with or followed by jelly-like mucus is Sepia. Do not confound with Graph., which has an enormous stool with much straining and sweating, and coated with and mixed with a substance looking like the cooked white of egg, as if covered with albumen.
In Sepia there is much offensiveness; the odor of the stool is unusual, loose stools horribly offensive, foetid; the sweat is fetid, the urine is foetid. "The stool has a putrid, sourish, foetid smell, expelled suddenly and the whole of it at once." Sepia is given in a routine way for constipation, when there are few symptoms. There is always a sense of fullness in the rectum after stool; ineffectual straining and sweating in the effort because the patient is weak and exhausted. Sepia has the ineffectual urging like Nux. She may go for days with no urging and then the effort is as if she were in labor. Prolapse of the rectum. Weight as of a ball in the anus not relieved by stool. Soreness of the anus. Expulsion of ascarides. Oozing moisture from the rectum, soreness between the buttocks. Haemorrhoids soon form when the rectum is so packed with faeces, and they give additional trouble.
There is much urinary trouble; involuntary urination as soon as the child goes to sleep at night. Sepia is compelled to keep the mind on the neck of the bladder or she will Iose the urine; urine is lost when coughing, sneezing, laughing, the slam of a door, a shock, or when the mind is diverted. Frequent, constant urging to urinate with milky urine that burns like fire and after standing a while a milky, greyish deposit will form which is hard to wash off the vessel BIoody urine, scanty and suppressed, great pain in the kidneys and bladder with great bearing down; sudden desire with tenesmus as if the uterus would come out. Sudden desire to urinate with cutting like knives and chill all over the body, if unable to pass it, as a lady in company. I remember a pitiable case. A saleswoman was obliged to go to the closet every few minutes; a violent pain like a knife cutting came with the desire to urinate and if the urine was not passed this pain would hold right on. She was compelled to keep her mind on the urine or she would lose it. She was tall, slim, with sallow face, distressed look, worn and tired. Sepia cured her and she was never troubled again.
The Sepia patient aborts at the third month. All sorts of ulcerative conditions, displacements, dragging down and relaxations. Retained placenta. Subinvolution, all the pelvic organs are tired and weak. Metrorrhagia during the climacteric or during pregnancy, especially at the fifth and seventh months.
Both male and female have aversion to the opposite sex. In the female there is a state as if she had indulged to excess, when this is not the case. No endurance, tired after coition, sleepless nights, sleep full of dreams, jerking of muscles, twitching, leucorrhoea, congestion of the pelvis. A woman who has been normal in her relations with her husband brings forth a child, and then the thought of sexual relations causes nausea and irritability.
The menstrual symptoms are of all sorts, no particular derangement characterizes Sepia. At one time it was thought that scanty menstruation was the more striking feature, but this is not necessarily so; from provings and clinical observations, it has cured profuse as well as scanty flow. Most violent dysmenorrhoea in girls of delicate fiber, sallow girls.
Sepia comes in when the woman ought to menstruate when the child ceases to nurse; sometimes the child dies and menses ought to be established but do not appear, and the mother runs down, pines away; Sepia will establish the flow. Calc. is the opposite; the menses come on while the child is nursing. Thick greenish acrid or milky leucorrhoea. Leucorrhoea in little girls.
In the male, old sycotic discharge that has resisted injection. Profuse yellow, or milky discharge from the urethra, or the "last drop," painless. Gonorrhoea after the acute symptoms have subsided. Urine loaded with urates, stains everything red and often excoriates, very foetid, associated with prostatitis. "Gleet; no pain; discharge only during the night, a drop or so staining the linen yellowish; yellowish discharge, no burning on urinating; painless; of a year and a half's standing; orifice of urethra stuck together in the morning, particularly when the sexual organs are debilitated by long continuance of disease or through frequent seminal emissions."
Warts on the genitals; Sepia is useful when these organs have been overused and take on such an appearance. Impotence in the male, loss of sexual feeling in the female.
The dose relation between this remedy and if Murex is worth considering. The muscular relaxation, dragging down in the abdomen and pelvis, aggravated from exertion and walking, ameliorated by sitting with the limbs crossed and ameliorated by pressure on the genitalia would be like both remedies; but add to this copious menstrual flow and violent sexual desire and Murex must be considered and Sepia eliminated. Both have extreme empty feeling in the stomach. Sepia has diminished sexual desire and often aversion. Murex has great soreness and congestion of the uterus, and she is constantly reminded of the uterus. Murex has acute pain in right side of uterus which crosses the body diagonally upward to left side of chest, or left breast. It cures violent dysmenorrhoea. It has been useful in cancer of the uterus. Watery, greenish, thick, bloody leucorrhoea, causing itching.
One of Sepia's most general characteristics is the amelioration from violent exercise; worse on beginning to move but better by getting warmed up. This condition is closely related to the back symptoms. There is a great amount of soreness in the back, the spine aches all the way down. Pressure on the spine reveals some places, spinal irritation. Aching in the back mostly from the loins to the coccyx, often coming on from sitting, and ameliorated from violent exercise. A peculiar feature is amelioration from hard pressure. The patient commonly puts a book low down on the chair and presses the back against it. Sepia does not seem to get the amelioration from lying upon the back as Natrum mur. does. Stooping aggravates the backache. "Backache worse from kneeling."
Under symptoms of the lower extremities we find great numbness of the feet. "Coldness of the legs and feet especially in the evening in bed; when the feet get warm the hands get cold; icy coldness of the feet; profuse sweat of the feet or sweat of unbearable odor causing soreness between the toes. Swelling of the limbs better while walking."
The sleep is full of dreams and distress; cannot sleep upon the left side because of palpitation of the heart Palpitation in sleep, with pulsations and trembling all the body, pulsations to the finger tips.
In old cases of suppressed malaria, Sepia brings back the chill, but its most useful sphere is after a bad selection of the remedy and the case becomes confused. Where a remedy has been selected for only a part of the case and changed it a little but the patient gets no better. It will be seen that the fever, chill, and sweat are just as erratic as can be. Natrum mur. is one of the greatest malarial remedies, but it is full of order like China, Sepia is full of disorder. In a case confused by remedies think of Calc., Ars., Sulph., Sepia and Ipecac. Never give China or Natrum mur. for irregular symptoms and stages.
Sepia is complementary to Natrum mur. Aside from the stupid condition of the mind it has an excitable condition of the general nervous system that is often marked in Natrum mur., as, for instance, being disturbed by a noise, the-slam of a door, etc. It produces jerking of the muscles in sleep; constantly wakes from imaginary noises, thinks someone has called her; the least disturbance about the house wakens her.
Worse before and during menses; during pregnancy; after eating; during first sleep; change of weather; during a thunderstorm; overwhelming fear.
SILICA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
The action of Silica is slow. In the proving, it takes a long time to develop the symptoms. It is, therefore, suited to complaints that develop slowly. At certain times of the year and under certain circumstances peculiar symptoms will come out. They may stay with the prover the balance of his life. Such are the long-acting, deep-acting remedies; they are capable of going so thoroughly into the vital order that hereditary disturbances are routed out. The Silica patient is chilly; his symptoms are developed in cold, damp weather, though often better in cold, dry weather; symptoms come out after a bath.
The mental state is peculiar. The patient lacks stamina. What Silica is to the stalk of grain in the field, it is to the human mind. Take the glossy, stiff, outer covering of a stalk of grain and examine it, and you will realize with what firmness it supports the head of grain until it ripens ; there is a gradual deposit of Silica in it to give it stamina. So it is with the mind; when the mind needs Silica it is in a state of weakness, embarrassment, dread, a state of yielding. If you should listen to the description of this state by a prominent clergyman or a lawyer, or a man in habit of appearing in public with self-confidence, firmness and fullness of thought and speech, he would tell you he had come to a state where he dreads to appear in public, he feels his own selfhood so that he cannot enter into his subject, he dreads it, he fears that he will fail, his mind will not work, he is worn out by prolonged efforts at mental work. But he will say that when he forces himself into the harness he can go on with ease, his usual self-command returns to him and he does well; he does his work with promptness, fullness, and accuracy. The peculiar Silica state is found in the dread of failure. If he has any unusual mental task to perform, he fears he will make a failure of it, yet he does it well. This is the early state; of course there comes a time when he cannot perform the work with accuracy and still he may need Silica.
Another case is illustrated in a young man who has studied for years and is now nearing the end of his course. He dreads the final examinations but he goes through them all right, then a fatigue comes upon him and for years he is unable to enter his profession. He has this dread of undertaking anything.
Irritable and irascible when aroused; when let alone he is timid, retiring, wants to shirk everything; mild, gentle, tearful women. The Silica child is cross and cries when spoken to. It is the natural complement and chronic of Puts. because of its great similarity; it is a deeper, more profound remedy. Religious melancholy, sadness, irritability, despondency. Lyc. is stupid, the dread of undertaking anything is from a general knowledge of inability. In Silica it is imaginary.
Silica is not suitable for the irritability and nervous exhaustion coming on from business brain-fag, but more for such brain-fag as belongs to professional men, students, lawyers, clergymen. A lawyer says, "I have never been myself since that John Doe case." He went through a prolonged effort and sleepless nights followed. Silica restores the brain.
The remedy produces inflammation about any fibrinous nidus and suppurates it out. It acts upon constitutions that are sluggish and inflames fibrous deposits about old imbedded missiles. Slow nutrition; if the individual receives a slight injury it suppurates and the cicatrix indurates, is hard and nodular. Along the track of a knife-cut, is a fibrinous deposit due to inferior and slow nutrition. An old ulcer heals with induration. Where cicatricial tissue forms, it is indurated, shiny, glassy. If Silica is given in such cases, it will throw out abscesses in these cicatrices and open them out. It will open up old ulcers and heal them with a normal cicatrix.
In ordinary people if a splinter lodges in the tissues, a suppuration will slough it out, but in these feeble constitutions a plastic deposit takes place about it and it remains. This is not the highest state of order. Suppuration takes place about a bullet and pushes it out, that is the best- state that can be asked for.
Silica, therefore, hastens the formation of abscesses and boils. It suppurates out old wens and indurated tumors. It has cured recurrent fibroids and old indurated tumors
If there is a deposit of tubercle in the lungs, Silica establishes an inflammation and throws it out, and if the whole lung be tubercular a general suppurative pneumonia will be the result; hence, the danger of giving such remedies and the danger of repeating them in advanced stage of phthisis. Not only Silica but many other remedies have the power to suppurate out deposits, the result of poor nutrition.
Warty growths on the skin, moist eruptions, pimples, pustules, abscesses. Suppurating cavities. It establishes healing in old fistulous openings with indurated margins. Catarrhal suppurations; copious muco-purulent discharge from the eyes, nose, ears, chest, vagina, etc.
Complaints from the suppression of discharges; suppressed sweat. These suppressions produce a state in the economy that threatens what little order is left. An offensive foot-sweat ceases after getting the feet wet, and is followed by chills and violent complaints. Silica cures long lasting foot-sweat when the symptoms agree, or complaints that have lasted since the suppression of a foot-sweat. Thick, yellow catarrhal discharges. They say, "I have had this discharge so many years," and when you investigate, you find that there has been some shock, a cold, that suppressed the foot-sweat and it has not appeared since. Silica will bring back the sweat, cause the catarrhal discharge to cease and in time cure the foot-sweat. Catarrhal discharges from the nose and other places, indurations, tumors, chronic gastritis, brain-fag, all dating back to the suppression of foot-sweat or otorrhoea, or to the healing up of a fistula.
Chronic sick-headache attended with nausea and even vomiting. Headache commencing in the back of the head in the morning or towards noon going to the forehead, worse towards night, from noise; better from heat; supra-orbital neuralgias; better from pressure and heat and attended with profuse head-sweat. Cold, clammy, offensive sweat on the forehead. When a Silica patient exerts himself he sweats on the face, the lower part of the body is dry or nearly so. It requires great exertion to produce general sweat. A striking feature is the sweat about the upper parts of the body and the head. Headache once a week (Gels., Lyc., . Sang., Sulph.) . Headache up through the back of the neck and especially to the right side of the head. Resembles Sang. Weight in the occiput as if it would be drawn back, with a rush of blood to the head, like Carbo veg. and Sepia. Headache worse from cold air. Psor. wears a fur cap even in summer. Magn. mur. is better from wrapping up the head but still wants to be in the- air. Rhus sweats on the body; the head is dry. Puls. sweats on one side of the head.
Vertigo to fainting; with nausea; vertigo creeping up the spine into the head. It is especially necessary for the Silica patient to avoid the cold air, must have the head well wrapped up, especially the part that is painful, and this part perspires copiously. "Headache worse from mental exertion, excessive study, noise, motion, even jarring from foot-steps, light, stooping, pressing at stool, talking, cold air, touch." Moist, scaly eruption on the scalp, eczema capitis.
Silica is suited to the phagedenic ulcers of syphilis, eating and spreading ulcers on the scalp. Inflammatory conditions between the scalp and skull, tumors forming, filled with a grumous fluid; as in infancy, it will remove blood tumors. Cephalatoma neonatorum, enchondroses. Silica is especially of use in the treatment of affections of the cartilages, growths about the joints, about the fingers and toes.
The complaints of Silica are associated with hardened glands, but especially about the neck, the cervical, salivary, and particularly the parotid glands; large, hard parotids. The parotids enlarge from every cold and get hard (Bar. carb., Calc., Sulph.). Puls. suits the acute inflammation of the parotid, but Silica is indicated in the more chronic forms due to psora, "scrofulous glands."
Many inflammations and conditions of the eyes. Ulcers on the cornea; pustules on the lids, falling of the lashes, suppuration of the margins of the lids with burning, stinging and redness. Intense photophobia in all eye complaints. Scrofulous cases with sore eyes; the most inveterate and chronic cases; suppuration; thin, watery, copious discharge, or bloody, thick and yellow like pus, with ulceration. Syphilitic iritis. "Perforating or sloughing ulcer on the cornea. Spots and cicatrices on the cornea. Fungus nematodes. Eyes inflamed from traumatic causes; foreign particles have lodged in the eyes; abscesses; boils around the eyes and lids; tarsal tumors, styes. Affections appearing in the angles of the eyes; fistula lachrymalis; stricture of lachrymal duct." This is a general survey of the eye affections in Silica.
There is no deeper remedy than Silica in eradicating the tubercular tendency, when the symptoms agree; most tubercular cases are worse from cold, wet weather; better in cold dry weather.
The most inveterate cases of catarrh of the ear; old offensive, thick, yellow otorrhoea; following scarlet fever; all sorts of abnormalities in hearing, even to deafness. Roaring in the ears associated with many diseases and hardness of hearing; hissing, roaring like steam; like a train of cars, many times from mechanical cause and other times from a condition of the nerves. It is commonly the beginning of a dry catarrh of the middle ear; the remedy is especially useful when, in catarrh of the middle ear and Eustachian tube, the deafness goes on for some time and the hearing returns with a snap, due to the escape of the accumulation of fluids somewhere and described by the patient as a snap or report. Sudden reports in the ear like a cannon, distant noises with return of hearing. "Otorrhoea, offensive, watery, curdy, with soreness of inner nose and crusts on upper lip, after abuse of Mercury, with caries." Caries of bone in any part of the body, but especially of the small bones of the ear, nose and mastoid process. "Scabs behind the ears." Rupture of the drum of the ear. Catarrhal conditions of the internal ear and Eustachian tube, with "feeling of sudden stoppage in the ear, better by gaping or swallowing." Especially with ear troubles, there will be associated indurated parotid glands.
Accumulation of hard crusts in the nose, loss of taste and smell; epistaxis, thickening of the mucous membrane; most vicious. catarrh with discharge of bone from the nose. Horrible, foetid ozaena, old syphilitic cases where the nasal bones are destroyed and the nose becomes a flabby bag, is sunken in or ulcerated away, leaving an opening. Silica may cure and an artificial nose be made afterwards.
Hepar competes with Silica in syphilitic nasal catarrhs where the parts are phagedenic; Hepar, Merc. cor. and Ars., are the principal antisyphilitics when there is phagedenic ulceration of the nose. Babies suffer from bloody nasal discharge. This is often Calc. sul.
The aspect of the Silica face is silky, anaemic, waxy, tired. Pustular and vesicular eruptions spread over the face, the wings of the nose crack, the lips easily fissure; crusts form on the margin between the mucous membrane and the skin; eruptions and crusts, indurations form. under the crusts, they peel off and there is no healing. These indurations are the same kind of inferior tissue that is found under lupus and epithelioma, a low tissue formation, a low state of eczema that favors infiltration. The small blood vessels that lead to them become thicker and thicker until they become gristly. There is a tendency to make the soft tissues harder and the hard tissues harder.
In childhood the bones become softer and even necrose or there is an inflammation of the periosteum and a. consequent necrosis. Caries of the shaft of the long bones, the head of the bones and the cartilaginous portions; abscesses in cartilages, enchondromata. Bones break down and form fistulous openings. Necrosis of the jaw, the joints, the hip-joint, the tibia, necrosis of the spine, of the vertebrae, so that there is curvature of the spine, lateral especially. The homoeopathic physician may treat these affections of the bones with the help of accessory contrivances or supports.
The Silica patient has rough lips, they crack and peel; rhagades. Scaly appearances at the margins of the lips, fissures in the corners of the mouth that indurate. There is often a line of fissure about the margin of the crust. Little crusts like epithelioma form upon the wings of the nose and when picked off leave a raw surface with no tendency to heal. Crusty formations upon the ears.
The teeth break down, lose their enamel surface; the dentine is made up largely of the silicate of lime and the surface of the tooth becomes rough, loses its shiny appearance and caries sets in. This often takes place at the margin of the gum; ulcers form on the tip of the fangs. The teeth suffer when it is cold or damp; toothache in wet weather, and the teeth are yellow, decay rapidly, and the gums settle away from them. All the neuralgias and toothaches are better in a warm room and from hot drinks. Abscesses about the gums and face, better by warmth. Severe pain in the jaw, rending, tearing at night, better from heat; these pains often end in abscesses about the teeth. Sometimes relieved by pressure unless the part is extremely sore from inflammation.
The tongue takes on an inflammation of gouty character; inflammation with threatening abscess, it fills the whole mouth; rending, tearing pains, worse at night and better from heat.
In the throat and neck we have inflammation and swelling of all the glands, external and internal, all at once or singly. Quinsy with great pain in the tonsils, one or both; threatening suppuration. Inflammation of the parotid, sublingual and much less frequently the submaxillary and cervical glands; painful, tumid and hard, with pain in the neck, shoulders and head, even in acute inflammations. But then we have the opposite state of affairs. In an old chronic case broken down with suffering the symptoms are worse after a bath, he wants warmth, dreads the cold, is always shivering. But when in the neck there is an acute inflammation the very opposite is present; he suffers from flushes of heat, an irregular, flushing fever, cold extremities while the upper part of the body is hot, sweat about the head and neck, sensation of heat and suffocation in a warm room. This will be present in quinsy and abscesses of the glands of the neck, if acute. Silica here shows its relation to Puls. The latter in its chronic manifestations is overburdened with heat, but in an acute trouble is chilly. They are reversed as to their acute and chronic states. Puls. in the beginning is chilly and sweating.
Silica is full of throat symptoms, but is seldom indicated in acute forms because its pace is too slow; it comes on after there has been a series of colds, such colds as are ameliorated a number of times by
Bell. or other acute remedies, but still continue to settle in the tonsils and in the glands of the neck. Silica breaks up the tendency. There is a catarrhal state in the throat that is roused up by every cold into an increased flux, with hoarseness, settling back into the chronic state again; chronic catarrhs of the pharynx. It competes with Natrum mur. in inveterate sore throat.
Silica disturbs the stomach, causes hiccough, nausea and vomiting; disturbs the liver. All these symptoms are connected and are hard to separate. Decided aversion to warm food, desires cold things, wants his tea moderately cold, he is willing to have his food cold, dislikes warm food. Sometimes there is a decided aversion to meat, but if he does take it, he prefers cold, sliced meat. He likes ice cream, ice water, and feels comfortable when it is in the stomach; it is sometimes impossible for him to drink hot fluids, they cause sweat about the face and head and cause hot flushes (Bar. c.).
Silica is disturbed by the extremes of heat and cold, easily affected in changes even of a few degrees; he has complaints from being overheated; he gets overheated easily, sweats easily from a slight change in the temperature and comes down with a cold.
Case: A physician waiting on an obstetrical case, had a little difficulty in the last stage and he became overheated; putting on his overcoat and hat he went out on the porch to cool off and was taken down with asthma, violent cough, copious expectoration with gagging and vomiting which lasted him for months. The acute remedies he had taken only palliated, but a dose of Silica cured him almost as quickly as he was taken down; he could not tolerate a warm room; the acute complaints of Silica are often worse in a warm room and from heat.
Silica has an aggravation from milk. Many times the infant is unable to take any kind of milk and, hence, the physician is driven to prescribe all the foods in the market if he does not know the right remedy. Natrum carb. and Silica are both useful when the mother's milk causes diarrhoea and vomiting. The routinist is likely to give such medicines as Aethusa, entirely forgetting Silica. The latter, as well as Natrum carb., has sour vomiting and sour curds in the stool. "Aversion to the mother's milk and vomiting." "Diarrhoea from milk." Put These two together.
Although the patient has an aversion to hot things and desires to eat cold things, yet in chest complaints cold water, ice cream and cold things in general, increase the cough to gagging, and then the retching is dreadful; violent, retching, gagging cough. Retching from an endeavor to expectorate is usually controlled by Carbo veg., but Silica has it.
"Water brash, with chilliness, with brown tongue; nausea and vomiting of what is drunk, worse in the morning; water tastes bad; vomits after drinking."
The Silica stomach is weak, in a do-nothing state; old dyspeptics that have been vomiting a long time, especially those who have an aversion to hot food, who cannot take milk, are averse to meat, where the mental and bodily symptoms agree.
Silica was one of the greatest remedies for the chronic diarrhoea in the soldiers of our late war. It cured a fair percentage of those sick from sleeping on damp ground, eating all sorts of food until the stomach and bowels were prostrated, from long marches, from going into the South from the cold North, from becoming overheated. It is like Sulphur in these symptoms.
Silica has some pain in the stomach and bowels, but there is more soreness to pressure; colic and flatulence and tenderness to pressure; a chronic soreness in the stomach and if it goes on too long, a tubercular state comes on. Abdominal pain relieved by heat; distension of the bowels with flatulence and rumbling. Enlarged abdomen in children and adults (Bar. c.); tightness across the abdomen. Disturbed by the pressure of the clothes and worse after eating; the decided feature is the amelioration from heat.
Constipation from inability of the rectum to expel the faeces. It is seldom that the stool lies in the rectum without urging like Alumina; there is much urging to stool but inability to expel. The stool may be in small balls or large and soft or large and hard, but there is much straining and sweating about the head and great suffering while straining; the rectum becomes impacted, he strains until he is weak and exhausted, the stool slips back, and he gives up in despair. The only way he can relieve himself is by some mechanical method. Great straining at stool belongs to many remedies, but especially to Alumina, Alumen, China, Natr. mur., Nux vom., Nux mosch, and Silica. Silica has removed tape-worm, when the symptoms agree (Calc., Sul.).
It has also cured fistulous openings. Patients who have a tendency to phthisis are subject to abscesses about the region of the rectum, that break inside or out and form complete or incomplete openings. These seem to take the place of what would otherwise come, and if healed by operation or other external means, the tendency is to end in chest trouble, either in form of a fixed catarrh or tubercular infiltrations. Silica is one of the remedies that turns the constitution into order and in one to five years the opening ceases to be necessary and it will heal. Surgeons heal it up at once, and for a time the patient is comfortable but in a few years he breaks down.
Caust., Berb., Calc. c., Calc. phos., Graph., Sulph., etc., are suitable in such cases. Silica here follows Thuja well. Suppurative conditions in the urinary tract, catarrh of the mucous membranes; old inveterate catarrh of the bladder with pus and blood in the urine; copious, stringy deposits in the urine. Prostatitis, suppuration, thick, foetid pus from the urethra. Gonorrhoea, pus, or pus-like discharge from the urethra, slight, shreddy discharge, bloody, purulent discharge. It is sometimes thick, or is curdy; this is from any mucous membrane. Abscesses along the penis, in the perineum, prostate gland, testes. Chronic inflammation and induration of the testes with much pain; testes feel as if squeezed, sensitive, painful. Hydrocele in boys or adults.
In the male, impotence; weakness of the genitals after coition, easily exhausted, lacks power; exhausted if he has coition with anything like ordinary frequency; it takes him & week or ten days to rest up (Agar.) Much sweating of the genitals with exhaustion, tired out in the spine, weak back.
Involuntary discharge of urine at night; enuresis in little boys and girls. In women a prostrated condition of the sexual functions. Serous cysts in the vagina, fistulous openings and abscesses about the vulva, which heal with hard nodules or do not heal at all; little oozing fistula, offensive, cheesy discharge. They heal in little nodules and then break out again in the same nidus. Women who are subject to these abscesses.
Bloody discharge between the periods. Iii Silica there is very easy flow of blood from the uterus; a haemmorrhagic flow comes on before the menses from excitement, and especially when nursing; when the child is put to the breast a flow of blood starts. Notice the distinction between Calc. and Silica. Calc. has a tendency to flow during lactation, but not when the child is put to the breast.
Silica cures hydrosalpinx and pyosalpinx, with copious, watery -dis- charge from the uterus. Sometimes a woman has a lump on one or the other side of the uterus, which steadily increases and all at once there is a flooding of watery, bloody, purulent fluid and the lump disappears, soon to fill up again and empty in the same way in a gushing flow. Such are the manifestations of hydrosalpinx and pyosalpinx.
Entire absence of the menses for months; amenorrhoea. Serous cysts in the vagina as large as a pea or an orange, projecting from the vagina or projecting upwards and flattened out in" conformation with it. Many little cysts Iike hickory-nuts grouped together. Rhod. and Silica have cured these even when there is a paucity of other symptoms. "Leucorrhoea, profuse, acrid, corroding, milky, preceded by cutting around the navel, causing biting pain, especially after acrid food; during urination; in gushes; with cancer of the uterus. Hard lumps in the mammae."
Threatened abscesses of the breasts. If the remedy is given in time, it will abort the entire trouble. Where the remedy has come too late and suppuration is inevitable, Silica comes in for its share. There may be throbbing, tenderness, and weight, yet the remedy controls the pain, hastens the conclusion, and the opening comes naturally, discharges little and closes at once. As sure as an anodyne is given, a hot poultice applied, you will fail with your remedies. There is too much blood in the part, and the application of a poultice increases the trouble; it causes an increased determination of blood to the part, and if suppuration takes place it causes more breaking down of tissue. Instead of a thimbleful of pus you will have cupfuls for days and half of the gland is destroyed.
Women who are so weak they tend to abort, or no conception takes place. It would seem if the organs were tired out and unable to perform their functions. The infant has all sorts of troubles. It grows up sickly; cannot tolerate its mother's milk or indeed any kind of food; vomiting and diarrhoea. A healthy child will digest even unwholesome milk.
The Silica cough is a dangerous one; the remedy suits the early stages of phthisis, when the lung is not extensively involved; it suits a cough of catarrhal character when the symptoms agree. If there is a small abscess in the lung with no tendency to heal, it brings about repair, causes contraction of its walls. Inveterate cases of catarrh of the chest with asthmatic wheezing, tremulous suffocation, inability to move, brought on by overheating, overexertion. After violent exertion and overheating, gets in a draft, or takes cold from a bath, becomes chilled. Humid asthma, coarse rattling, the chest seems filled with mucus, seems as if he would suffocate. Especially the asthma of old sycotics, or in children of sycotic parents. It competes with Natr. sul. in such cases. The patient is pale, waxy, anaemic, with great prostration and thirst
Asthmatic attacks from suppressed gonorrhoea, with Iiability to develop complaints from over-exertion and over-heating, as in most sycotics.
Dry, teasing cough with hoarseness, threatening tuberculosis of the larynx; peculiar cracked yoke from thickening of the laryngeal mucous membrane or tubercular involvement; soreness of the chest threatening miliary tuberculosis, with aggravation from cold and amelioration from warm drinks. Pulmonary affections in stone-cutters. The fine dust causes chronic irritation. Silica establishes a suppuration and throws off these particles of stone. Expectoration profuse, foetid, green, purulent; only during the day; viscid, milky, acrid mucus, at times pale, frothy blood.
Chronic tendency for colds to settle in the chest and bring on asthmatic symptoms. Chronic bronchitis; inflammation of the lungs with suppuration. Silica especially suits the later stages of pneumonia and the old, chronic complaints following pneumonia. Slow recovery after pneumonia (Lyc., Sulph., Phos., Sil., Calc.). Flushes, rattling in the chest. Flushes in the face during the day (Sulph., Sep., Lach.), rattling like Ant. tart., flushes like Sulph. and Lyc.
Phthisis ; thick, yellow, green, foetid sputa, more pronounced coldness than Calc., and head sweat, pains in the lungs, sore lungs, stitches. In the extremities we have inflammation of the periosteum. Corns (Ant. cr., Graph.). Ingrowing toe-nails. Rheumatism of the soles of the. feet. Cannot walk (Ant. cr., Med., Ruta, Sil.). Begins to sweat as soon as he falls asleep (Puls., Con.). Epilepsy; aura in the solar plexus creeping into the chest and stomach. Complementary to Calc., Puls., and Thuja.
SPIGELIA ANTHELMINTICA
Spigelia is especially known by its pains. It is indicated in persons who are debilitated from taking cold and who have become rheumatic, run down, victims of pain. Hardly a nerve in the body escapes; shooting, burning, tearing, neuralgic pains; they are most marked about the eyes and jaws, neck, face, teeth, shoulders, burning like hot needles through the face and neck in any direction, stitching, tearing, worse from motion, from doing anything, even thinking, mental exertion, worse from eating. Pains in the neck and shoulders are better from heat; those about the eyes are better from cold.
Shooting, tearing pains in the extremities like hot wires. Sometimes the pains are worse from lying down, but most commonly better from keeping still; worse from light, eating, motion, jarring; so sore in the painful region that any gentle exercise lie going up or down stairs, or riding in a carriage that jars, makes the pain unbearable.
The Spigelia patient is sensitive to cold, to atmospheric changes, he is a rheumatic patient, but the nerves are attacked by neuralgia. Violent pains about the eyes. Routine practice the use of the remedy to this region. Worse from hard pressure though sometimes better from it, if gentle and prolonged, firm pressure, but any movement of the pressing hand aggravates. The part is turgesced and inflamed. Eyes red and engorged.
Neuralgic affections of the muscles of the chest. Many of the Spigelia pains in the chest are attributed to the heart, but there is intercostal neuralgia; tearing pains shooting into the shoulders and neck, especially the left side and down the arm. Pains shooting hither and thither. Irregularity of the heart. Painful complaints associated with valvular troubles, especially growing out of rheumatism. Pericarditis and endocarditis of rheumatic character. Thrusting pains in the chest like a knife, in the eye like a knife.
This remedy needs further proving, its mental symptoms are scarcely known. "Weak memory; disinclination to work; restless and anxious, solicitude about the future; gloomy, suicidal mood; afraid of pointed things, pins, etc.; easily irritated or offended." This is all that is thought worthy of admission into the Guiding Symptoms, showing that the mental state has not been well brought out. Many complaints are manifested in the morning; tired in the morning and full of tearing pains.
Old anaemic subjects where there has been a transfer of the complaints to the nerves; broken down, pallid, nervous, with neuralgia, palpitation, irregular pulse. Vertigo on rising; gets up with violent pains and dizziness. So nervous that she must "fly," full of excitement, cannot keep still, cannot keep control of herself.
Pulsating and stitching in the head; sometimes better lying with the head high; worse from stooping, motion, and from noise. Sometimes better from washing in cold water when the pain is about the eyes and head, but worse after washing; better while the cold water is applied. With these headaches and neuralgias there is stiff neck and shoulders, an apparent stiffness in that he cannot move on account of pain. He sits in a chair as if transfixed, is aggravated from noise, light, from seeing things move in the room, which he must follow with his eyes. "Fine burning, tearing pains in the brain." It seems to be in the brain, but is more likely in the nerves of the scalp. "Violent pain in the left parietal bone on motion or walking or making a misstep; toward evening violent pressure and pressing outward in the forehead, worse from stooping, worse from pressure with the hand; tensive tearing pain in the forehead, especially beneath the frontal eminence, extending towards orbitis." Notice the intensity of the pains. Burrowing, tearing pain in the occiput, in the left side of the vertex and forehead, worse from motion, from loud noise, and when he speaks loudly or even on opening the mouth slightly; better when lying down. Pressive pain in the right side of the forehead, involving the right eye, in the morning in bed, but still more after rising; pain deeply seated, unaffected by pressure, very acute on motion, on suddenly turning the head, the brain seemed to be loose; worse from every jar, step, or straining at stool. When moving the muscles of the face, there is a sensation as if the head would burst. Sensation as if a band were about the head. Neuralgic pain settles in and above the left eye, or below it, from cold in damp, rainy weather; hyperaesthesia of the filaments of the fifth pair.
On the pain first beginning, there is not so much hyperaesthesia, but as it goes on this increases and the eye becomes congested. I have seen the pains so severe that they produced perfect prostration, cold sweat, vomiting. The Hepar patient is so sensitive to pain that he becomes unconscious; faints with the pain. Chain. feels pain with such intensity that he gives way to violent frenzy, irritability, and outbursts of anger.
The Spigelia patient suffers intensely and the pain leaves its mark, the part becomes red and inflamed and sensitive. The head pains are worse from warmth; better temporarily from cold; the pains in other regions are the reverse.
The Phos. head and stomach symptoms are better from cold ; the chest and body are better from warmth. In Ars. the head is often better by washing in cold water, while the patient himself is sensitive to the cold and wants warmth in the rest of his complaints.
Spigelia is full of visual symptoms; visual symptoms bring on complaints; at times he can do nothing but look straight ahead, for he has vertigo even when there is no pain, from looking downwards, everything goes round in a whirl. Such a state is common to many people when they look down from a height, but Spigelia has it from looking down along his nose, so he sits and looks straight ahead.
Esophoria; exophoria; disturbances in accommodation; all sorts of tiny spasmodic conditions; it is most difficult to fit glasses; no settled focus, no fixed vision. Spigelia has- from a- mere neuralgic state what Ruta has from eye strain. Latent errors of vision.
Eyes that are always changing need a remedy. Stabbing pains in and around the eye, often radiating in every direction from one point Eye-ball sensitive to touch. Eyes worse when thinking about them. Worse at night. Intolerable, pressing pain, worse on turning the eye, dizzy on attempting to move the eyes, must turn the whole head to see. Pain radiates to the frontal sinuses and head. Sensation as if the eyes were too large for its orbit.
I remember a patient who had been travelling about from oculist to oculist, who had many visual troubles and no glasses would suit. She had one sharp, stinging pain over the left eye day and night and she could only sleep when worn out. Lac fel. cured. Constant, fine, stinging pain over left eye was brought out by the provers of cat's milk.
This medicine has cured a pterygium, probably a false pterygium, that came from violent neuralgia, prolonged and lasting for months.
Stitching pains in the chest, worse from the least movement, breathing, sensation of tearing in the chest; trembling feeling in the chest when moving the arms or from any movement. Can lie only on the right side with the head high. Rheumatic troubles especially in the left side of the chest. Feeling as if the heart were compressed with a hand. Purring feeling over the region of the heart, wave-like motion not synchronous with the pulse. Waving palpitation not synchronous with the pulse. Trembling of the carotids. Acute pericarditis with anxiety and weight in the precordium. These troubles following a rheumatic attack, at its close or many months after the fever has subsided. Spigelia is seldom indicated in rheumatism of the heart in phlegmatic persons who do not feel intensely.
When a rheumatic affection attacks the venous side of the heart, and there is a sense of stuffiness, of fullness through the whole body, limbs swollen, but do not pit on pressure, face mottled, it is a serious case and may end in Bright's disease and death.
SQUILLA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Squilla was given in the olden times by the old school in all lung, bronchial, and kidney affections; pneumonia, asthma, scanty urine and dropsical affections.
Cough: Has a loose morning cough and a dry evening cough (Alum., Carbo veg., Phos. ac., Sep., Stram., Puls, Squilla). Puls. and Squil. being strong here, but Squil. has a hard cough; coughs, gags, sneezes; urine escapes and quite frequently faeces; the patient coughs until he is covered with sweat, he gags and coughs and finally succeeds in raising two or three little lumps of white, tenacious mucus; it is a spasmodic cough caused by mucus in the trachea or a tickling, creeping sensation in the chest.
The loose morning cough is worse than the dry evening cough. Patient chilly; cannot have the least draft; wants plenty of clothing and is very sensitive to cold; not so in Puls. Urine is generally copious, watery, colorless.
About 2 A. M. to 12 or 2 P. M. there is the most dyspnoea from filling up of the chest with mucus; this same feeling returns during the hour, but it is from cardiac weakness. Copious, colorless urine is one of its important symptoms and resembles Ign., but Squil. is not a hysterical patient like Ign. Quite similar to Can. hid. or Gels. in brain affections, but Squil. has not many brain affections nor many febrile symptoms. Phos. has inflammation of the brain and when the dangerous turn comes this increase of urine is a bad sign. Puls. tearful, then copious urine. Squil. copious, colorless urine in diabetes ; when this seems to disappear and chest symptoms appear, these troubles disappear and kidney troubles appear, these would disappear and dropsy comes up; when the urine would get copious again these dropsical symptoms would disappear and Squil. acts a long time.
There is a copious, colorless flow from the nose, more especially in the morning; the cough is similar to Tart. emet.
Squil. in its internal nature is quite like Thuja in regard to its spurting urine and its spasmodic cough; with the escape of urine there is more or less of escape of faeces of a dark brown or black fluid in frothy bubbles, very offensive, painless, involuntary.
Respiration difficult with stitches. in the chest when breathing and coughing. Great dyspnoea, the child cannot drink; seizes the cup eagerly, but can drink only in sips; frequently obliged to take a deep breath which provokes a cough; shortness of breath on every exertion. Pains in the chest aggravated in the morning. Dull rheumatic pains aggravated when exercising; ameliorated while at rest. Evening dry cough with sweetish expectoration. Great heat in the body. Follows well after Bry. Absolute lack of sweat is a characteristic.
Dry cough at II P. m. worse from cold water and cold air (Rumex). Bell. has cough at II P. m worse from uncovering, red face, congestion in head. Lach. soon after going to sleep, which may be II P. M.
Nasal discharge acrid, corroding, worse in the morning; violent sneezing. Stool dark brown or black.
Seldom much cough during day. Pneumonia. Stitches when inhaling, jerking pains; always right side; catarrh of the chest and threatened pneumonia after haemorrhage from the lungs. Soreness in the chest, worse from motion. Bry. will often palliate and the case will go into Squilla.
STAPHISAGRIA
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
The mental symptoms are very important, and the impressions nude upon the mind and thence upon the body guide to Staphisagria as a remedy. Excitable, easily aroused to anger, but seldom irascible, that is, easily disturbed and excited, but seldom manifests it. Suitable in cases where complaints come from pent up wrath, suppressed anger, suppressed feelings. The person becomes speechless from suppressed indignation, anger with indignation. Complaints brought on by these causes; irritable bladder with frequent urging to urinate, lasting many days after suppressed wrath, after insults. "Great indignation about things done by others or by himself; grieves about consequences."
A gentleman comes in contact with one beneath his station and an altercation takes place, an argument which ends in insult, and the gentleman turns his back on the other. He goes home and suffers; he does not speak it out, but controls it and then suffers from it. He has sleepless nights and many days of fatigue, brain-fag; for days and weeks he cannot add nor subtract, makes mistakes in writing and speaking, has irritability of the bladder, colic, etc. Loss of memory with a sense of weight between the eyes; it is difficult to say whether this is a feeling in the head or an effort to describe a dullness of mind Feels as if a ball of wood were in the forehead, or as if the whole cerebrum were made of wood; it feels mumb. It is difficult to state whether it is a condition of the mind or head. Accompanying this sensation of a lump in the forehead is a feeling as if the whole bark of the head were hollow; the patient may describe it as a feeling of numbness or a lack of sensation.
"Indifferent, low-spirited, dullness of mind after onanism." Staph. cures these conditions when they are the result of sexual excitement, masturbation, excesses in venery, allowing the mind to dwell too much on venereal subjects. Thinking on sexual relations. These patients are irritable, easily fatigued, most excitable, and when they have to control their emotions they suffer intensely. One who is in health can easily put aside a controversy, knowing that he has done what is right, but a Staph. patient when he has to control himself goes all to pieces, trembles from head to foot, loses his voice, his ability to work, cannot sleep and a headache follows.
Many a time a man has come into my office with blue lips, trembling hands, pains about the heart and all over, and he thinks he is going to die. He tells a story of an altercation and pent up wrath, and Staph. stops his trembling and quiets him. Without it he would have sleepless nights, brain-fag, prostration and headache. This state belongs especially to those who have indulged in sexual excesses.
Now, the next step. The senses are in this same irritable state, so that the tips of the fingers are sensitive, the ears are sensitive to noise, the tongue is sensitive to tastes and the nose to odors; so sensitive that everything is painfully sensated. Every little inflamed spot will have in its center sensitive points, little nerve spots; ulcers when touched cause the patient to go all to pieces and a convulsion threatens.
Haemorrhoidal tumors are so sensitive that they cannot be touched. Little nerve tumors form in the skin, little polypoid growths the size of a wheat grain and denuded of epithelium, covered with moisture, red, inflamed, blue, and a mere touch will throw the patient into convulsions and suffering for days and nights. A hyper-sensitive nerve growth will come out on the hand or on the back. Sometimes it turns black. Again, a little wart will come out, especially about the genitals and anus, little caruncular growths about the urethra and vagina, so sensitive that if nipped between the fingers the patient will go into spasms, especially if a woman. Staph. suits all three of the miasms.
These nervous states run all through the complaints. Look for a case of Staph. where the whole mind and nervous system are in a fret.
The Staph. headache is a numb, dull pain in the occiput and forehead, especially in these nervous constitutions. "Sensation as of a round ball in the forehead, sitting firmly there even when shaking the head. Headaches from vexation and indignation.
Crusty, squamous eruptions on the scalp. "Painful sensitiveness of the scalp, skin peels off, with itching and smarting, worse in the evening and from getting warm." The scales are lifted up by a watery exudate and the denuded surface is extremely sensitive to touch. New growths about the lids and balls of the eyes, extremely to the touch. Meibomian tumors (Con., Thuja), in irritable children (Kreos.).
Another feature in Staph. is its action en the g ands ; scrofulous glands; glands of the neck enlarge; enlarged and indurated ovaries and testes; stitching, tearing pains in the glands everywhere. Hardness and chronic induration.
Stitching, tearing pains along the course of the nerves; in the heart, and as in such a nervous patient the mind is Iikely to be on the heart, the stitching pains in the intercostals are supposed to be in the heart. Stitching pains directly through the chest to the back. Swelling of the tonsils after the abuse of Mercury. Chronic tonsilitis, tonsils are not large but hard from previous attacks of acute tonsilitis; strumous diathesis; cross and irritable. "Pains come on after eating."
The Staph. patient has much difficulty in the bowels. Subject to chronic diarrhoea and to constipation. Colic, twitching, tearing pains in the abdomen. Diarrhoea from cold water, from eating, from indignation, anger, with flatulence of a terribly offensive odor like spoiled eggs. "Chronic diarrhoea or dysentery of weakly, sickly children after anger; after being punished, after emotions." (Coloc. and Chant.)
Staph. and Coloc. resemble each other. In both, eating and drinking cause griping and stool, both have colic as if stones were squeezing; Staph. in the intestines, head and testes; Coloc. in the intestines and ovaries; both are worse from anger. Caust., Coloc. and Staph. follow each other like Sulph., Calc. and Lyc.
It often happens that nervous women soon after marriage are attacked with frequent and painful urging to urinate which becomes extremely troublesome and may last many days. Staph. is very comforting to the young wife. Great teasing and tearing all night long; bloody urine; involuntary discharge of urine, acrid and corroding, with burning, worse front motion. Profuse discharge of pale urine with burning and urging. Burning during and after urination.
Staph. has cured enlarged prostate with frequent urging to urinate especially in old men; continued teasing with dribbling. "Frequent urging to urinate, with a scanty discharge in thin stream or discharge of urine in drops; may be followed by a sensation - as if the bladder were not fully emptied.
The most distressing symptom of the male genitals is excitability, but there is also impotence, great weakness of the sexual organs; the sexual desire is greatly increased but there is impotence. Useful in the results of secret vice, long practiced. "Seminal emissions followed by great chagrin and mortification, prostration, dyspnoea. Effects of onanism or sexual excesses; loss of memory, hypochondriasis, taciturnity, face sunken, abashed look, nocturnal emissions, backache, weak legs, relaxed organs, deficiency of vital heat and tendency to take cold, deep sunken, red, and lusterless eyes, hair falls out; loss of prostatic fluid and impairment of sexual desire; dull and contusive pains in the testicles, voluptuous itching of the scrotum, atrophy of the testicles." Think of the extremely nervous patient.
Dry, sensitive warts about the genitals, from sycosis or from the abuse of Mercury, which causes a tendency to warty growths. Moist, red, offensive warts belong to Thuja. The testes dwindle as well as become inflamed and swollen; genitals waste away. Sensation as if there were worms crawling over him. Crawling, etc., in the female external genitals, Coff., Plat., Petrol., Apis, Tarant. Hisp., the latter has. While outer parts feel as if insects were biting and crawling, better from heat or cold.
In the female there is violent sexual excitement, nymphomania with extreme mental and physical impressions; mind has been dwelling too much on sexual subjects. "Very sharp, shooting pains in the ovary, which is exquisitely sore to touch; pains extend along crural regions and thighs. Menses irregular, late and profuse, sometimes wanting; first of pale blood, then dark and dotted. Scorbutic diathesis, vegetations of the vagina; stinging, itching of the vulva."
Stitching in the region of the heart; trembling of the body with nervous excitement is an excellent indication for Staph. Effects from loss of blood, shock, from surgical operations, injuries from sharp instruments, incised wounds. Stinging, etc., in surgical wounds, cuts; colic after lithotomy, urging to stool, qualmishness, worse from drinking.
Tetter on the hands, itches and burns in the evening after scratching; numbness in the tips of the fingers; arthritic nodosities on the fingers. I remember a patient suffering from gouty nodosities; he had lived a life of peculiar continence, dwelling on his vices, broken down in body. Staph. brought out an eruption on his legs as high up as the knees that looked like a pair of trousers. One continuous coat of crusts which lasted a year before T it dwindled, but he was greatly improved in his body and his enlarged joints gradually improved. The eruption was s yellow, crusty, tough, Ieathery, and, when lifted up by the moisture beneath, it had to be cut off Iike a bandage; he was practically crippled; new crops came out on the parts clipped off. It was with difficulty that he walked, for the crusts cut him.
Bone troubles, exostoses, inflammation of the periosteum. Acute articular rheumatism of fast or debilitated men, with shifting pains. Mercurial bone diseases, ulcers, caries, injuries caused by sharp, cutting instruments. Nightly bone pains.
Asaf., Merc., Sil.
SULPHURIC ACID
The sensation of quivering all over the body and in the limbs without visible trembling is a very strong symptom of Sulphuric acid, and especially if it is associated with weakness that has been of long standing. The exhaustion, excitability and hurried feeling are constant factors. The haemorrhagic disposition with many complaints. Black fluid blood from all the orifices of the body. Small red spots enlarging rapidly to resemble purpura haemorrhagica. Blue-black spots on the skin from slight injury. Blood-red spots on the skin like those on a brook trout sometimes after injuries. Chafing easily followed by ulceration. Boils and bedsores. It has many of the complaints found in old people. The morning aggravation of symptoms is also a strong feature. Sensitive to cold and emaciation. The pains are bruised, burning, tearing, stitching, shooting and jerking. The pain comes on slowly and departs suddenly. The discharges are dark, thin blood or blood-streaked; or thin, yellow and bloody. The discharges are excoriating. General sweat after eating. The symptoms predominate on the right side. It is often indicated in sour smelling babies like Hepar, and it is as sensitive to touch and nearly as sensitive to cold. When it has cured the sensitiveness to cold the patient often becomes worse and requires Pulsatilla, which is the complement and antidote.
Prostration of mind and body, with extreme sadness, weeps continuously. Nothing can be done to please him. Fretful and irritable over the slightest cause. He cannot eat and work fast enough. No one does anything to please him; in such a hurry if doing anything or going anywhere. All things must be done at once. Unwilling to answer. Irresolution. Vertigo in close room. Better walking in the open air. Better lying. Sometimes compelling him to keep his bed. Tension in the forehead with coryza.
The brain seems loose and seems to fall to side lain on, better sitting perfectly still, worse walking. The blood flows strongly to the head and the feet become cold. Electric shocks in forehead and temples in forenoon and again in evening. Sensation as though a plug were being driven into the skull by strong blows. The pains in the head come on slowly and cease suddenly. Violent headaches in debilitated people. Extreme soreness in the periosteum such as is found in syphilis. The hair falls out or turns gray. Ulceration of the scalp. Extremely sensitive eruptions. Lachrymation when reading. Chronic inflammation of the eye with enlarged veins and ulceration. Sensation of foreign body in right outer canthus. Soreness in the eyes with coryza.
Severe ear pains that increase gradually and cease suddenly. Gradual loss of hearing. Bloody discharge from ear. Buzzing in the ear. Slowly oozing, dark, thin blood from the nose in the evening. It cures acrid, bloody discharge from nose in feeble patients when the generals are covered by it. The coryza is dry or fluid with loss of smell and taste.
The face of the Sulphuric acid patient is a most sickly one. Pale, sickly and sometimes jaundiced. The expression of long suffering is marked. The deep lines of pain, depletion and emaciation. Tension of the face or a sensation as though white of egg had dried on it. Violent neuralgic pains of the face coming on gradually and ceasing suddenly, ameliorated by warmth and lying on the painful side. Small red spots or specks on the face gradually increasing in size. Inflammation of the submaxillary gland.
The teeth decay early. Violent neuralgia of the teeth, coming on slowly-and ceasing suddenly. Worse from cold and better from heat, worse in the evening in bed. The teeth are on edge. Loss of taste during coryza. The sore mouth is one of its most important features. It is our most frequently indicated remedy for nursing sore mouth. The aphthous mouth of infant or mother with yellowish or whitish ulcers. Bloody saliva from mouth; vesicles in the mouth. Breath very offensive. Bleeding from the mucous surfaces of mouth and gums with or without purpura haemorrhagica. Rapidly spreading ulcers in the mouth.
Inflammation of the throat that is aphthous or follicular. Denuded mucous membrane. Diphtheritic exudate yellowish or white with aphthous surroundings and bleeding from nose, gums or other parts. Diphtheria with more than ordinary exhaustion and foetor. The uvula is oedematous. The throat is full of spreading ulcers. Painful sore throat with painful, difficult swallowing. During the throat troubles fluids drunk run out of nose, Salivation, glands of throat swollen and there is great swelling of the tonsils, soft palate and throat in general. Dark fluid blood from throat and mouth.
He craves brandy and fruit. Loss of appetite and progressive weakness are strong features. Aversion to the smell of coffee. He cannot drink cold water, as it feels so cold in the stomach and makes him chilly. Violent, spasmodic hiccough, such as occurs in drunkards. Chronic heart burn. Sour belching. Sour vomiting. The teeth are always on edge from sour eructations. Sour vomiting during pregnancy. Vomiting of drunkards in the morning. (Compare Arsenicum.) Sour and very foul. Nausea and shivering. Coughing and belching sour fluids. The stomach seems to hang down as if relaxed. Vomiting after drinking cold water. Violent, spasmodic pains in the stomach. The pains come gradually and cease suddenly. The sour vomiting is most like Robinia.
She does not vomit food, but cannot eat, as it causes pain in stomach and she vomits mucus. After intermittent fever had existed some time the spleen enlarges, and is painful on coughing and sore to touch. Stitching pains in spleen and liver. It has many times overcome the poison of lead and lead colic. Sinking, weak feeling in abdomen after stool. Weak feeling in abdomen, as though menses would come on. Labor-like pains in abdomen, extending to hips and back.
Diarrhoea with great general weakness and sensation of trembling. With weak, sinking sensation in the abdomen after stool. Chronic diarrhoea with much suffering. Excoriating stools, burning in rectum during stool. Diarrhoea brought on from the least indiscretion in eating, after fruit, especially if unripe, after oysters. Stool watery, orange - yellow, stringy, mucous, mixed with blood, greenish, black, undigested smelling like spoiled eggs. Haemorrhoids very sore, itching, painful during stool, in drunkards. In constipation the stool is in small balls. Pain in the bladder if the desire to pass urine is postponed. It has cured diabetes. Scanty urine. Bloody urine. Cuticle in the urine.
The menses are too frequent and copious and the flow is dark and thin. Many symptoms come before the menses. Nightmare before menses. Has nightmare at the close of the menses. The vagina is prolapsed and gangrenous. Leucorrhoea bloody, acrid, milky or albuminous, yellow. The woman at the climacteric period has many symptoms peculiar to Sulphuric acid. The flashes of heat, weakness, sensation of trembling, a nervous hurry in all her actions and feelings, bleeding from uterus and other parts of blood that does not coagulate, and constipation with small, hard balls like sheep's dung are symptoms common to the critical period. It often causes the vomiting of pregnancy. Vomiting preceded by cough.
It has cured sterility when it was supposed to depend upon the copious and frequent menstrual flow. Violent itching of the vulva. Pain and soreness in the larynx. Pain in the larynx on swallowing. Hoarseness with a dry feeling and sensation of roughness in the larynx. Weak chest and great dyspnoea. Rapid movement of the wings of nose like Lycopodium. Rapid moving up and down of the larynx during the dyspnoea. Short of breath.
Except in the morning the cough is dry and hacking. Sometimes in two coughs. He coughs in the open air, either walking or riding, worse from cold drinks and from the odor of coffee. Cough followed by itching and vomiting. The irritation is felt in the chest. The expectoration is in the morning of dark, thin blood, or of thin, yellowish, blood-streaked mucus tasting sour.
Weakness in the chest with burning and stitching pain. Pressure on left side of chest. Profuse haemorrhage from the lungs of dark fluid blood, after pneumonia, and during the climacteric period. Ulceration of lungs (compare Kali carb.). Oppression of the chest and suffocation unless he lets the legs hang down. It has been a very useful remedy in the first steps of phthisis with profuse sweat and great weakness, but where given in the last stage it has appeared to bring on haemorrhage and increase of the inflammatory condition in the lungs. Stitching pains in the heart, palpitation. It has been useful in pleuritic exudation.
Great-weakness in the spine, felt mostly when standing and sitting Pain in the lumbar region. Soreness between shoulder blades when coughing. Stiffening of the back in the morning on rising. Large abscess on the right side of the neck. Black and blue spots on the limbs. Stitching pain in the shoulder joint on lifting the arm. Stitches in finger joints. Chafing of thighs after rising. Marked weakness in knees and ankles. Swollen veins of feet. Chilblains of frost-bitten parts. Twitching of fingers during sleep.
Late falling asleep and wakens too early. Nightmare before menses. It has chilliness, flashes of heat with sweat. Copious sweat mostly on upper part of body, from motion, sour, cold, after eating warm food. Morning sweats. Night sweats. Typhoid fever with great prostration. Bleeding from capillaries. Dark, thin blood. Haemorrhage of dark, thin blood from the bowels. Putrid forms of continued fever. Cadaveric countenance.
Echymoses, purpura haemorrhagica. Old cicatrices turn red and become painful. Itching and prickling with eruptions. Pimples. Red itching blotches on the skin. Livid spots. Contusions, bedsores. Boils and abscesses. Nodular urticarias. It cures old indolent ulcers that bleed easily a dark blood. Sensitive painful spreading ulcers. Stinging burning pain in ulcers. It has cured putrid ulcers on legs. It is useful in ulcers of drunkards, in ulcers following a low form of fever. Thin yellow or bloody discharge.
THERIDION
more information and order at Remedia Homeopathy
Hysterical sensitivity with extreme aggravation from noise, motion and exertion marks this remedy as unique. The pains are aggravated from noise, and motion, and the nerves are in such a state of sensitivity that a painful thrill passes over the body in waves and nausea follows. Nausea from noise is strikingly strange. It cures the most stubborn cases of spinal irritation, when the symptoms agree. Chronic catarrh of the nose. Necrosis of bone. Quick consumption. Emaciation. Enlargement of glands. Constant hunger and thirst. It was a remedy with the old masters for scrofulous conditions. Great lassitude. Complaints are ameliorated by warmth, and during rest. Fainting from least exertion. Chilliness, trembling and anxiety. So restless that she must keep busy, though she accomplishes nothing. The bones are sore.
Sadness and mental depression. Hysterical conduct, hilarity. Aversion to work, and to his business. Joyousness and singing with headache. Vertigo on closing the eyes, from motion, from stooping, on board a vessel, from every noise, with nausea, vomiting, and cold sweat. Awakens at 11 P. M. with vertigo and slow pulse. Vertigo with dim vision and pain in eyes. Vertigo and nausea from dosing the eyes when kneeling in church. Vertigo like sea-sickness.
The headache is most violent, aggravated on motion, aggravated talking, aggravated from warm drinks, with nausea and vomiting. Sensitive to light and noise. Pain in forehead extending to occiput, aggravated from noise, motion, and cold air. Headache on beginning to move. Sensation as if vertex did not belong to her, as though she could lift it off. Pain deep in eye. Complaints from sunstroke. Pressing pain in temples. Pulsating pain over Ieft eve and across forehead. Cannot lie down with the headache. Itching of scalp, and nape in evening.
This remedy cures many nervous eye symptoms. Flickering, even when eyes are closed. Like a veil before the eyes. Double vision. Sensitive to light. Diplopia. Fluttering. Nausea, and cold hands. Pressing pain behind eyes. On closing eyes, nausea and vomiting. The hearing is very acute. Every least noise penetrates the whole body, especially the teeth, aggravates vertigo and causes nausea. Rushing noises in ears like a waterfall. Pressure about the ears. Fullness behind the ears.
It has cured most obstinate catarrh of nose with offensive thick yellow or greenish yellow discharges. Pressing pain at root of nose. Dryness in nose. Paroxysms of violent sneezing. The face is pale and sickly. Lockjaw in morning on waking. Foam at mouth with chill. Teeth sensitive to cold water and shrill sounds. Toothache causes weeping. Burning in teeth. Salty taste in mouth. The tongue feels as if burnt. Mouth feels numb. Taste impaired. Desires wine and sour drinks. Much thirst. Desires food, but does not know what.
Nausea with many complaints and from many causes. Nausea in the morning on rising, from noise, on closing the eyes, when looking too long at one object, on motion, from talking, from fast riding in a carriage, from riding on the cars or on a ship. Nausea with headache, with vertigo; nausea aggravated from warm drinks. In seasickness of nervous women when they close the eyes to get rid of the motion of the vessel they become deathly sick. Tenderness of stomach.
This is a useful remedy in many liver conditions, with burning pain, aggravated from touch, motion and noise, and bilious vomiting. Pain in groin in a man after coitus; on motion, and on drawing up the limb. Constipation, with difficult, soft stool. Contraction of anus. Enlarged prostate gland with sensation of a lump in perineum. Must arise several times during the night to pass urine. Copious urine during the night.
Feeble erection and diminished desire. Seminal emissions during sleep in the afternoon. Sore bruised pain in the ovarian region, aggravated by motion. Menses suppressed. Sighing and short breath on ascending stairs. Stitching in chest beneath left shoulder to throat. Quick consumption. Anxiety about heart.
Very sensitive spine, aggravated from motion, noise, a jar, stepping. Pain between scapulae. .Spinal anaemia. Itching of back and nape. Drawing in thighs with a cold sensation, ameliorated by warmth. Violent itching of calf. Swelling of feet. Heaviness of the limbs. Pain in bones as if broken. Shaking chill. Sweats easily. Icy cold perspiration with fainting vertigo and vomiting at night. Violent itching of skin.
TUBERCULINUM BOVINUM
I want to take up the study of Tuberculinum. The preparation which I use is a little different from that which is generally found in the market. This preparation I procured through a Professor of Veterinary Surgery. In Pennsylvania there came a time when a handsome herd of cattle had to be slaughtered because of tuberculosis. Through the Veterinary Surgeon of the Pennsylvania University I secured some of the tubercular glands from these slaughtered cattle. I selected from these the most likely specimen. This was potentized by Boericke & Tafel as far as the 6th, and has since been prepared on the Skinner machine, the 30th, 200th, 100th and the higher potencies. This preparation I have been using for fifteen years. Many of my friends have been using it, as they have procured it from me.
From observing the effects of this preparation I have been gathering these notes in my inter-leaved Hering's Guiding Symptoms, and they now guide me in the use of Tuberculinum. I do not use Tuberc. merely because it is a nosode, or with the idea that generally prevails of using nosodes; that is a product of the disease for the disease, and the results of the disease. This I fear is too much the prevailing thought in using nosodes. In certain places it prevails and is taught that anything that relates to syphilis must be treated with Syphilinum; that anything relating to gonorrhoea must be treated with Medorrhinum, anything psoric must be treated with Psorinum, and anything that relates to tuberculosis must be treated with Tuberculinum. That will go out of use some day; it is mere isopathy, and it is an unsound doctrine. It is not the better idea of Homceopathy. It is not based upon sound principles. It belongs to a hysterical Homoeopathy that prevails in this century. Yet much good has come out of it.
It is hoped that provings may be made so that we may be able to prescribe Tuberc. on the symptoms of Tuberc. just as we would use any drug. It is deep acting, constitutionally deep, because it is a product of disease from a very deep-seated constitutional condition, like Silica and Sulphur. It goes deep into the life; it is antipsoric; it is long acting, and it affects constitutions more deeply than most remedies; and when our deepest remedies act only a few weeks, and they have to be changed, this remedy comes in as one of the remedies, when the symptoms agree, and brings a better state of reaction, so that remedies hold longer. It may well be considered a species of Psorinum.
One of the most prominent uses of this remedy is in intermittent fever. Some of our most stubborn cases of intermittent fever will relapse and continue relapsing, even when such remedies as Silica Calcarea and the deeper-acting remedies have been indicated, have acted well, have broken the fever, and in a few weeks, from exposure to cold, from sitting in a draft, from becoming fatigued, from mental exertion, from over-eating and from disordering the stomach this ague has returned. Any of these circumstances will bring back these stubborn cases of intermittent fever when Tuberc. is needed. When a patient is travelling toward phthisis and he is exposed and intermittent comes out. He is of a feeble constitution and his complaints have a tendency to relapse, and remedies well selected do not hold long, though they act well at first, they must soon be changed, changing symptoms.
It is not an indication for Tuberc. when the well selected remedy fails to act. Well selected is a relative expression and involves too much of human opinion. It may be thought to be well selected when it is not related to the case. When the well selected remedy has acted and the constitution shows a tendency to break down, and the well selected remedy does not hold, because of vital weakness and because of deep-seated tendencies; then it is that this remedy sometimes fits in. Such a case is often tuberculous in inclination, even though no evidence is present of a pathological character.
Burnett dropped an idea, that has been confirmed many times. Patients who have inherited phthisis, patients whose parents have died of phthisis are often of feeble vitality. They do not throw off their inherited tendencies. They are always tired. They take on sicknesses easily. They become anaemic; nervous; waxy or pale. These conditions are sometimes met, when the finer symptoms agree, although Burnett evidently used this medicine in a sort of routine way for this kind of constitution, which he called "Consumptiveness." Persons who had inherited phthisis, who were debilitated and anaemic.
It seems from looking over the record of many cures that this remedy has been given many times for just that state on a paucity of symptoms, and if the records can be believed it has many times balanced up the constitution in that anaemic state, where the inheritance has beets. It is not the best indication for Tuberc., but where the symptoms agree in addition to that inheritance, then you may have indications for the remedy.
If Tuberculinum bovinum be given in 10m., 50m., cm., and mm. potencies, two doses of each potency at long intervals, all children and Young people who have inherited tuberculosis may be immmuned from their inheritance and their resiliency will be restored. It cures most cases of adenoids and tuberculous glands of the neck. The notes that have guided me to its use I will attempt to explain. The mental symptoms that I have seen give way while the patient was under treatment, and the mental symptoms that I have seen crop cut under the provings, and the mental symptoms that I have so often seen associated when the patient is poisoned by the tubercular toxines are such as belong to many complaints and are cured by Tuberc. Hopelessness in many complaints. Aversion to mental work. Anxiety evening, until midnight. Anxiety during fever. Loquacity during fever. Weary of life. Cosmopolitan. Tormenting, persistent thoughts during the night. Thoughts intrude and crowd upon each other during the night. These I will say are the common mental features, and have often yielded when the remedy has been prescribed. Anyone who has inherited phthisis, anyone who has been in a state of debility, who has had intermittent fever with continual relapses, and these mental symptoms are present, you may think of Tuberc. Loquacity during fever is a common feature in hectic fever when the patient is decidedly affected by the toxines of tuberculosis. A person gradually running down, never finding the right remedy, or relief only momentarily; has a constant desire to change, and travel, and go somewhere, and do something different, or to find a new doctor. The desire to travel, that cosmopolitan condition of the mind belongs so strongly to the one who needs Tuberc. It comes out so often in clinical experience, is found so often in the Calcareas, and especially in Calc. phos., always wanting to go somewhere. Such is the condition of those about to go into insanity, about to go into some lingering disease. Persons on the border-land of insanity. It is true that phthisis and insanity are convertible conditions, the one falls into the other. Many cases that are treated and cured, and phthisis of the lungs has just been turned aside, finally become insane. Persons who have been cured of insanity go into phthisis and die, showing the deep-seated character of their nature. The intellectual symptoms and the lung symptoms are interchangeable.
Tuberculinum cures the most violent and the most chronic periodical sick headaches, periodical nervous headaches. Coming every week; every two weeks; and the irregular periodicity coming under certain conditions, in damp weather, after overwork, from mental excitement, from overeating, disordered stomach, Tuberc. breaks up the tendency o this chronic periodical headache when the symptoms agree.
It has been observed in the hands of good prescribers that when chronic constitutional headaches have been broken up sometimes the patient has a tendency to lose flesh and become feeble. An entire transformation scene takes place; a cough sets in; the headache has been removed, but the patient is feeble. Wherever that takes place Tuberc. is a most useful remedy. A new manifestation comes; a new organ is affected.
Sore bruised feeling all over the body. Aching of the bones. Sore bruised condition of the eyeballs, sensitive to touch, and on turning the eye sideways. Persons who have long felt the weakness of tuberculosis, tubercular conditions, and are subject to cold sweat en the head. This was brought out in the provings of Calcarca, and those about to go into phthisis have many times been cured by Calcarca. The relationship between Tuberc. and Calc. is very close. They are interchangeable; that is, the one may be indicated for a while, and then the other. They are both deep-acting remedies, also Silica is closely related to Tuberc., on the same plane of action, going deep into the life in a similar way; Calcarca, Tuberc. and Silica, and the Silicates.
In the Guiding Symptoms is a record, "Pain in the head, as if the head had a tight hoop of iron around it;" an iron band. Headache, with frequent sharp cutting pains. Headache, worse from motion. In the Guiding Symptoms, "A sullen, taciturn, irritable" condition of mind. "Screams in his sleep. Is very restless at night. Sister died of tubercular meningitis." That symptom was given by Burnett. It has cured hydrocephalus. Many years ago Doctor Biegler cured a case of tubercular meningitis with Tuberc. In many instances it has cured tubercular meningitis and tubercular diseases of the brain in the early stages.
The face becomes red, even to purple, during the chill, and during the heat. Aversion to all food. Such aversion to meat that it becomes impossible to cat it. Thirst during the chill and heat, for large quantities of cold water. It has cured tubercular meningitis with effusion, where the head was greatly enlarged. Craving for cold milk. Emptiness in the abdomen, with faint feeling. Anxiety in the abdomen and stomach, much like the Sulphur sensation described. An all-gone, hungry feeling, that drives him to eat. This has been cured by Tuberc. after Sulphur had failed.
All know what a marked feature emaciation is in persons who are going into phthisis. The emaciation often begins before there is any sign of phthisis, gradually Iosing flesh. A gradually growing weakness, a gradually increasing fatigue. This is a prominent place for Tuberc.--if the symptoms agree. Always Iet that stand out boldly, IF THE SYMPTOMS AGREE, and WHEN THE SYMPTOMS AGREE. Of course it will be said that Tuberc. has cured when there are few symptoms; this is granted, but should not be lauded as a clinical practices.
It is a common feature of tubercular affections of the brain and of the meninges to suffer from constipation. Stool large and hard; or, constipation alternating with diarrhoea. It is a well-Down clinical fact. Constipation is a strong feature of Tuberc. "Constipation, stool large and hard; then diarrhoea. Itching of the anus. Sudden diarrhoea before breakfast, with nausea. Inguinal glands indurated and visible. Excessive sweat in chronic diarrhoea." That symptom was brought out by. Burnett. It was merely a clinical symptom. Burnett dwells on this phase of it; "Tabes Mesenterica." "Swelling on left side, also on right; complains of a stitch in side after running; languid and indisposed to talk. Nervous and irritable. Talks in his sleep; grinds his teeth. Appetite poor. Hands blue. Indurated and palpable glands everywhere. A drum belly. Spleen region bulging out." That was one of Burnett's clinical cases. That was cured by Burnett's Bacillinum. In most instances, I am informed, he used the Bacillinum 200th.
It is a common feature of Sulphur to be driven out of bed in the morning by a diarrhoea. It is a very common feature in cases of phthisis, and patients going into phthisis. In advanced stages of phthisis, driven out of bed with a diarrhoea; or, diarrhoea worse in the morning than at any other time in the twenty-four hours. This is a common feature of phthisis that Tuberc. has cured, and it has been verified many times, although it is a clinical symptom. General relaxation. Weakness and hanging down of the genitals. Relaxed scrotum.
Menses too early, too profuse, long lasting. Amenorrhoea. Dysmnenorrhoea. Cough before, and during chill. Suffocation; worse in a warm room. Tubercular deposits in apices of lungs (left). The uterus sags down and is heavy. At the menstrual period, a relaxation, as if the inner parts would come out.
Dry hacking cough before the evening chill (Rhus t.), and the hacking cough lasts sometimes during the chill, and sometimes during the fever, but he knows the chill is coming by the cough. The patient has been cured perhaps a number of times by remedies. Intermittent fever has been cured a number of times by remedies well selected. The fever goes away promptly under the action of the remedy; but from slight exposure, as was mentioned, it comes back again. Now, at the end of three, four or five weeks, often two or three, he says, "I know my old chills are coming back again, because of the cough I have." The previous remedies have not been successful. They are not deep enough acting, they are not long enough acting. When the homoeopathic remedy is really and truly able to cure the diseased condition it will hold that case, so that when the symptoms come back will be indicated, and only a changed potency again the same remedy perhaps will be necessary. The same remedy is sled for; bet it is an indication for Tuberc. when at every coming back of the case it calls for a new remedy. Calcarca breaks up the case once, and the next time it comes back it calls for something else, and the next time for something else, and it keeps turning around. Perhaps a number of times it calls for the same remedies again. Changing about. That very changing and unsatisfied symptom image is a strong indication for this medicine.
Suffocation in a warm room. Can find easy breathing only when riding in the cold wind. When phthisical patients find no comfort except riding in the cold wind, which is a rare symptom, but has been noticed. This was a symptom specially marked in the lamented Gregg, of Buffalo. He would ride out in the cold winds by the lake for hours. Arg. nit. many times relieved that, but it is a strong symptom of Tuberc. He finally died of tuberculosis.
Desire for deep breathing. Longs for the open air. Wants the doors and windows open. Sits in the room covered with a cold sweat, but wants the air, wants fresh air. When covered with cold sweat he cannot have the wind blowing on him because he takes cold, he is sensitive to it, but he wants the fresh air, he wants the open air. Especially when the tubercular deposits begin in the apex of the left lung, which is the indication that has been verified by quite a number of observers.
"Hard, dry cough. Hard, dry, shaking cough," were symptoms noticed by Boardman, regardless of phthisis. The expectoration is thick, yellow, often yellowish-green in catarrhal conditions. Hacking cough in young girls, where there is a suppression of the menstrual flow, of the first menses. They come on once or twice or three times, and the patient is yellow, is puny, is tired, has a hacking cough, and a suspicious chest. If the tubercular deposits have not gone too far, Tuberc. may arrest the progress of the disease. Tuberc. often gives immunity if taken before the tuberculosis begins in those who have inherited it. It immunes the constitution.
Another marked feature recorded by Burnett was ringworms. Burnett was of the opinion that ringworms commonly formed upon those who had inherited phthisis. He thought it was a. sign of approaching phthisis, that it was a very common feature of those who have inherited phthisis; and he used the Bacillinum 200th. He used it somewhat as a routine remedy on every child with ringworm. Patients who suffer from weakness in the evening. Rapid pulse in the evening. Every evening for years he has noticed the pulse has been rapid. Palpitation after the evening meal.
Jerking of the muscles on going to sleep, and during sleep. Rheumatic pain in the right elbow. Sore bruised condition of the bones and periosteum. Aching, drawing pains in the limbs during rest, better by walking. A strong feature of this remedy is that its pains and aches are better by motion. I have seen this aching distress in the limbs many times where Rhus has acted only temporarily or has failed; where Rhus seemed to be the remedy, but was not deep enough to hold its action. Where Rhus was superficially indicated, or the deep action of the disturbance, the deep inheritance, the tired constitution, the chronic nature of the case prevents the action of Rhus, and Tuberc. cures these cases. Especially in girls that are bookkeepers, and shopkeepers, who have inherited phthisical constitutions, who have aches and pains during damp weather, in rainy weather, during a storm, when the weather changes, when the weather becomes cold; then it is that Tuberc. cures after such remedies as Rhus have failed; these patients are better by motion, better by walking; worse during rest. While sitting the pains become so severe that he is driven to travel, driven to walk. Aching, drawing pains in limbs during rest, better walking. Coldness of left foot and leg, evening in bed. Stitching pains in limbs during rest. Wandering . pains in limbs, in joints. Pains all over the body, but mostly in lower limbs. Aching, drawing, tearing, as if in bones, and nerves, during rest; better walking. Pains in bones of lower limbs. Stiffness on beginning to move. Sore bruised joints. Pains all ameliorated by heat. Drawing pains in thighs. Stitching pains in limbs. Restless. Stiffness of lower limbs, evening. Physical exertion aggravates.
Complaints worse standing; must move. This is as marked in this remedy as in Sulphur. Intermittent fever, with drawing in limbs during rest. Chill 7 P. M. Chilliness, evening; better in bed. Chill 5 P. M., with thirst. Cough before chill, during chill, and vomiting during fever. Wants to be covered during all stages. Extreme heat, with chilliness. Relapsing intermittents. Drawing in the limbs in the evening before the chill, and during the chill. He knows the chill is coming on because of the drawing in the limbs. Chill at 11 o'clock at night. Must be covered up during all stages, the chill, the fever and the sweat. The chilliness extends into the fever and into the sweat if there is any uncovering.
Aching in the bones of the head, with soreness of the periosteum and these are better by traveling about, Iike Rhus. Better by motion; worse keeping still. Perspiration from mental exertion. Perspiration stains the linen yellow. Heat and perspiration during sleep. We know what a common feature it is in phthisis to have night sweats.
Formication in the skin. This remedy has cured tubercular eruptions of the skin. This remedy has cured red purplish eruptions that are nodular in character; the patient wants to sit all the time by the fire, itching in cold air, better by going to the fire, worse from scratching. Sensitive to every change of the weather, especially to cold, and to clamp weather, and sometimes to warm damp weather, and to rainy weather. Always worse before a storm. Can feel every electric change in the weather. Becoming cold brings on all the symptoms, pains, aches, distresses and sufferings. A large list of symptoms of patients that have been cured in all their varying conditions may be found by looking up the Guiding Symptoms. Periodicity, then, is a strong feature of this remedy, and sensitive to weather changes. Fainting fits. Weakness after a short walk. It has cured constitutional headaches, periodical headaches, that existed forty-five years. It cures even old people of these periodical complaints.
The pains will sometimes travel. Stitching, pinching, cramping, wandering; and always worse from cold, and from cold damp weather.
VALERIAN
This remedy cures many nervous and hysterical phenomena in excitable women and children, and the complaints of the hypochondriac. Great nervous excitability, exaltation, hysterical contractures, trembling, palpitation, sense of levitation, paroxysmal respiration, stitching pains, tension in the limbs, jerking, twitching, globus hystericus. Sensation of something warm rising from the stomach, causing paroxysmal suffocation. All the nerves are in a fret. Oversensitiveness of all the senses; great nervous restlessness. All these general symptoms come on during rest, and are relieved by motion and moving about. Fainting easily. Slight exertion brings on symptoms. Complaints change about, and pains wander from place to place. It is a great remedy for the numerous nondescript nervous manifestations that come in. Spinal irritation when there is amelioration by motion and aggravation by much exertion. Exertion brings on headache in these cases. Stitching pains all over the body during rest.
The mental state is often ecstatic or hysterical. The mind undergoes rapid changes in disposition and ideas. The mental symptoms come on at night; sees images, animals and men. The mental state is one of extreme activity tension, excitement, passes from one subject to another. Erroneous ideas; thinks she is someone else, moves to the edge of the bed to make room; imagines animals lying near her which she fears she may hurt. Fear in the evening in the dark.
Symptoms aggravated in the dark. Great sadness and irritability. Morose, easily exasperated. Mental symptoms come on during rest, while sitting and lying, and go off on walking about. Vertigo when stooping. Feels light as if floating in air.
Violent nervous headaches in evening during rest, ameliorated by motion. Stupefying pains in head. Stitching, tearing pain. Sensation of great coldness in head. Headache from exposure to the heat and light of the sun. Aggravated in the open air and from a draft. Pain in forehead and through the eyes. Tension and constriction of the scalp. Icy coldness in vertex.
Wild look in the eyes. Flashes of light before the eyes in the dark. Pressure in the eyes in the morning. Smarting in eyes. Vision very sharp. Hearing acute. Jerking pains. Hissing and ringing in ears. Face red and hot in open air. Stitching in face and teeth. Sudden jerking pain in face. Twitching in the muscles and drawing pain in face. Neuralgia of face, aggravated during rest.
Thickly coated tongue; rancid taste. Flat taste in mouth on waking. Sensation as if a thread were hanging down the throat with salivation and vomiting. Voracious hunger with nausea. Symptoms aggravated when stomach is empty, ameliorated after breakfast. Complaints from fasting. Eructations, like spoiled eggs, morning. Eructation of rancid fluid. Nausea, faintness, body icy cold. Child vomits as soon as it nurses after mother has been angry. Child vomits curdled milk in lumps.
Distended abdomen. Cutting pain in abdomen. Colic. Cramps in hysterical women, in evening in bed and after dinner. Watery diarrhoea with curds in. infants. Greenish papescent stool and blood with cramp in abdomen and tenesmus, in children. Worms in the stool. Prolapsus of the anus when straining to pass urine. Copious frequent urination in nervous women. Sediment of urine red and white.
Menses late and scanty. Choking in throat pit on Inspirations grow less deep and more rapid until they cease; then she catches her breath by a sobbing effort, in spells. (Compare Ignatia, Ox. ac.) Paroxysmal respiration in hysterical and very nervous women. Globus hystericus. Jerking stitching pain in chest. Oppression of the chest with lump in the throat. Stitching in right side of chest and liver. Stitching in heart with pulse quick, small and weak. Pain in small of back during rest, ameliorated by walking Rheumatic pains in scapulae.
Rheumatic pains in all the limbs, aggravated during rest after previous exertion, ameliorated walking. Drawing, jerking of limbs, and twitching of muscles during rest. Heaviness in limbs, drawing, feels as though must move the limbs but cannot. Darting pains in arms and shoulders. Drawing in the muscles with stitching pains in arms. Hysterical contractures in hands and arms. Crampy darting, tearing, like an electric shock, repeatedly through the humerus, intensely painful. Cramp in biceps when writing. Pain along the sciatic when standing, ameliorated walking. Tearing pain in thigh upward to hip. Tearing in calf when crossing limbs. Tearing in muscles of thighs during rest. Violent drawing, jerking pains in lower limbs during rest. Drawing in thighs, legs and tendo-Achillis when sitting, ameliorated walking. Pain in ankles after exertion, ascending stairs, ameliorated walking. Drawing in tarsal joints when sitting. Pain in heel during rest. Violent drawing, jerking pains in lower limbs and hip, aggravated standing. Hysterical cramps in lower limbs, calves and feet. Sleepless before midnight. Cramps in hands and feet prevent sleep. Vivid dreams. Symptoms aggravated on waking.


James Tyler Kent
James Tyler Kent (1849 - 1916) was an American physician and a forefather of modern homeopathy. He is said to have contributed as much as Hahnemann to homeopathy. In 1897 Kent published a massive guidebook on human ailments and their associated homeopathic remedies. Nowadays this magnum opus is still in use.
